a
Robert Boydand Pete J. Richers

ssG doe
a

ISBN O-eeb-06931-1

Culture and the Evolutionary Process
Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson
How do genetic, psychological, sociological, and cultural factors combine to

change societies? Boyd and Richerson
develop models to analyze how biology
and culture interact, under the influence of
evolutionary processes, to produce the
diversity we see in human cultures. Using
analytical methods developed by evolutionary biologists, they propose a theory
of cultural evolution that is original,
rigorous, and fair-minded.
Explicitly linking genetic and cultural
evolution in a unified theoretical framework, the authors create mathematical

models to express relationships between
individual behavior and the large-scale,
long-term behavior of societies. They
investigate how cultural evolution is
affected by variations in patterns of social
learning; how learning, invention, and
individual decisions create forces of
cultural evolution; and how natural selection can act directly and indirectly on

culturally transmitted information. Boyd
and Richerson also address such controversial issues as the adequacy of sociobiologists’ explanations of human behavior,
the nature of large-scale cooperation in
human societies, and the evolution of symbolic behavior.

(Continued on back flap)

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/cultureevolutionO0O0Oboyd

CULTURE
and the

EVOLUTIONARY
PROCESS

1é

Robert Boyd & Peter J. Richerson

CULTURE
and the

EVOLUTIONARY
PROCESS

niversity of Chicago

at Emory
Robert Boyd is assistant professor of anthropology
of
University. Peter J. Richerson is professor in the Division
Davis.
ia,
Californ
of
ty
Universi
the
at
Studies
Environmental
,
Their work on this subject has been published in many journals
of
Journal
the
Biology,
cal
Theoreti
of
Journal
the
including
Human Ecology, and
Economic Behavior and Organization,
BioScience.

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 1985 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 1985
Printed in the United States of America

94 93 92 91 90 89 88 87 86 85 54321

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Boyd, Robert.

Culture and the evolutionary process.
Bibliography: p. 301
Includes indexes.
1. Social evolution.
I. Richerson, Peter J.

GN360.B68
1985
ISBN 0-226-06931-1

2. Human evolution.
II. Title.

304.5

84-24125

Contents
Preface
Overview
An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model
The Relationship between Genetic and Cultural Evolution
The General Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory
Conclusion
Some Methodological Preliminaries
Darwinian Approach
Modeling Complex Phenomena
Use of Data
In Defense of Mathematical Models
In Defense of Analogies
Conclusion
The Cultural Inheritance System
Defining Cultural Inheritance
Review of Data from the Social Sciences
Models of Cultural Transmission
Conclusion

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance
Models of Learning
The Force of Guided Variation
The Evolution of Cultural Transmission
Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission
Conclusion
Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate
An Overview of Biased Transmission
Models of Direct Bias
The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias
An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses
The Empirical Evidence
Conclusion
The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations: Conflicts
between Cultural and Genetic Evolution
Empirical Examples
Models of Natural Selection
The Evolution of Nonparental Transmission

vi

Contents

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias
and Guided Variation
The Demographic Transition
Conclusion
Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation
Models of Frequency-dependent Bias
The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission
Empirical Research on Conformity
Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection
Conclusion
Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits
Evidence for Indirect Bias
Models of Indirect Bias
The Runaway Process
Possible Examples of the Runaway Process
Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes
Conclusion
Conclusion
Summary of the Main Results
Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory
Future Work
Conclusion

190
199
202
204
206
ZAS
223
pa}
240
241
244
247
29
268
Zh
279
280
282
289
294
299

References and Author Index
Subject Index

301
Si)

Preface
In 1974 we were assigned to co-teach an introductory environmental studies course
for nonmajors. The course was supposed to present both the natural and social
scientists’ points of view on environmental problems. Previous offerings had focused on applied questions, but we decided to analyze environmental problems
with a set of simple principles based on the notion that humans adapt to environments as other organisms do. Although both of us were trained as natural scientists,
we knew that social scientists had made extensive use of concepts from ecology,
particularly the notion of adaptation. For our limited purpose, it looked easy and
fun to do the same. A little knowledge is always dangerous! Although it was true
that social scientists had used the concept of adaptation, frequently even invoked
analogies from biology, we could find no systematic theoretical argument for
cultural behavior that paralleled the Darwinian theory of biologists. Anthropologists sometimes noted general similarities between culture and genes, but they
usually stressed the differences, and therefore the autonomy, of anthropological
theory. Furthermore, even the rather limited uses of evolutionary theory made in
the study of human behavior were often quite controversial. Relatively uncontroversial syntheses, such as Dobzhansky’s Mankind Evolving, seemed quite incomplete and unsatisfactory, despite the vigor of their assertions. Only the chance
discovery of a very nice paper by Don Campbell gave us any encouragement at all.
In the end we became convinced that what we had discovered was more promising
as a topic for research than as a principle for organizing a freshman class.
Being ecologists by training, we had more enthusiasm than expertise to bring to
this project. Our only other natural qualification for the task was a dubious one: we
lacked the preconceptions that would have resulted from a more appropriate background. We were more than usually dependent on the help of unselfish colleagues
and patient students. But we ought to begin by thanking several individuals,
without naming any names, who honestly and candidly advised us not to waste time
on such a questionable enterprise. We appreciate having friends who give such
counsel even when we do not take it.
Several people read and commented on the whole text, often on multiple drafts,

including Eric Smith, who made especially extensive and useful comments, Michael Wade and Susan Paulsen, who both carefully read the mathematical sections
and saved us from several errors, and B. J. Williams, Bob Brandon, Joan Silk, and

Lois Richerson. Joan was also responsible for the research on the tattooing example
in Chapter 8 and for a number of technical comments on other points. Others read
and commented in detail on several chapters, including David Hull, Rick Michod,
Vil

viii

Preface

Jim Peoples, Robert Seyfarth, John Staddon, John Terrell, and Bill Wimsatt. Jim

Cheverud gave us comments on Chapter 4, Emmy Werner and Larry Harper on
Chapter 3, Daniel Rancour-Laferriere on Chapter 8, and Alex Rosenberg on Chapter 2. Avi Pervelotsky read several sections of the text and helped us manage the
bibliography. Gary Macey, Ara Hakopian, and Marie Follo helped with bibliographic chores and with the index.
A number of people read early drafts of the book or related papers, or attended
seminars, and gave us useful advice, help on technical points, and moral support.
First among these individuals was Don Campbell. His intellectual contribution to
our work is only partially described by citations in the text, and for his personal
interest and many courtesies on our behalf we are especially grateful. Bill Davis
gave us a long-running personal seminar in anthropology and sociology that contributed more than any other single interchange to our knowledge of these two
disciplines. Michael Wade acted as RB’s host during an NSF postdoctoral year at
the University of Chicago and gave us help with the manuscript. Gerald Edelman
and the Neurosciences Institute were our hosts during the last stages of preparing
the text. Ron Pulliam suggested the basic elements of Chapter 4 and gave us other
help. John Gillespie helped with the analytical techniques used in Chapter 4. Marc
Feldman and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza allowed us to attend their class on cultural
evolution in 1978, and Michael Turelli his graduate class in population genetics in
1979. Francisco Ayala helped us find financial support for the project on a couple
of crucial occasions and was a source of several courtesies and bits of advice.
Others with whom we had useful interactions of one kind or another include
Richard Alexander, Stevan Arnold, Nancy Berte, Laura Betzig, Peter Brown,
Napoleon Chagnon, Anne Clark, Dick Day, Tom Dietz, Bill Durham, Gerry
Edelman, Lief Finkel, Mark Flinn, Morris Freilich, Vic Goldberg, Marjorie Grene,
Bill Hamilton, Jack Hirshleifer, Bill Irons, Russell Lande, Charles Lumsden,

Robert Merphy, Richard Nelson, Robert Richards, Ledyard Stebbins, George
Stocking, Paul Sabatier, Paul Turk, John Werren, John Wiley, George Williams,
Dave Wilson, Sidney Winter, and E. O. Wilson. Students in several seminars and

courses, and anonymous reviewers of our papers and this book, provided useful
suggestions and criticism.
Dolores Dumont typed, edited, and produced all too many drafts and copies of
drafts of the book. Her organizational skills often covered for our lack of them. Bob
and Ann Schneider were gracious and thoughtful hosts during RB’s many stays in
Davis. PJR would like to thank the School of Forestry and Environmental Studies,
Duke University, and the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. He is
also indebted to the University of California—Davis for granting him a sabbatical
leave in which to complete the book.

1
Overview
To study Metaphysics, as they have always been studied appears to me to be
like puzzling at astronomy without mechanics.
Charles Darwin, N notebook, p. 5, 3 Oct. 1838

Origin of man now proved.—Metaphysics must flourish.—He who understand
baboon would do more toward metaphysics than Locke.
Charles Darwin, M notebook, p. 84, 16 Aug. 1838

The year 1838 was an intense period in the life of Charles Darwin. He was busy
unpacking and cataloging specimens he had collected on the Beagle voyage; he was
courting Emma Wedgwood, whom he would shortly marry; and he was earnestly
and eagerly searching for an explanation of the origin of species. After several false
starts, in late September Darwin read Malthus and for the first time grasped the idea
of evolution by inherited variation and selective retention. In July of the same year,

Darwin began a new series of notebooks, the M and N notebooks. These notebooks, only recently transcribed (Gruber with Barrett,

1974), reveal that even

before he understood natural selection Darwin was convinced that an explanation
of evolution would profoundly affect our understanding of human behavior.
Darwin’s reasoning was simple and compelling. The behavioral adaptations that
characterize the human species are the result of the same evolutionary process that
shaped all other species. If we understand that process and the conditions under
which the human species evolved, we will have the basis for a scientific understanding of human nature. Trying to comprehend human nature without an understanding of human evolution is “like puzzling at astronomy without mechanics.”
Nonetheless, until very recently evolutionary biology has made relatively
modest contributions to psychology, anthropology, or any of the other social
sciences. The rejection of a central role for Darwinism by the mainstream of
twentieth-century social science has been a historical process of some complexity.
Certainly one important factor was that Darwin’s ideas were ill appreciated until the
mid-twentieth-century synthesis of Darwinism and population genetics. Another
was that until recently biologists had failed to produce an adequate account of the
evolution of social behavior and therefore had very little to say about humans that
was of interest to social scientists. Most important, we believe, was the apparent
importance of culture in shaping human behavior. Many scholars, from both the
social and biological sciences, have argued that because humans acquire so much
of their behavior culturally rather than genetically, the human evolutionary process

2

Overview

is fundamentally different from that of other animals. However,

since the neo-

Darwinian theory of evolution does not explicitly account for the cultural transmission of behavior from one generation to the next, there has been no way of
knowing whether this argument is cogent.
This book outlines a Darwinian theory of the evolution of cultural organisms. By
“culture” we mean the transmission from one generation to the next, via teaching
and imitation, of knowledge, values, and other factors that influence behavior.

Cultural transmission may have a variety of structures. By “structures” we mean the
patterns of socialization by which a given trait or set of traits are transmitted in a
given society. For example, parents may enculturate their offspring or peers may
enculturate each other. A Darwinian theory ultimately should be capable of answering two closely related questions about the evolutionary properties of cultural
transmission. First, the theory should predict the effect of different structures of
cultural transmission on the evolutionary process. For example, do particular kinds
of behaviors become common

when individuals imitate their peers? Second, the

theory should allow us to understand the conditions under which different structures
of cultural transmission might evolve. For example, when should natural selection
favor the mutual enculturation of individuals by their peers? Clearly, we must be
able to answer the first kind of question before we can address the second.
To amend neo-Darwinian theory so that it addresses these questions we proceed
in two steps. First, we construct simple mathematical models of cultural transmission in which the assumed structures of cultural transmission are based as much
as possible on the results of empirical research done by psychologists and anthropologists. Thus we restrict attention to the structures of cultural transmission
observed in the human species. These models demonstrate that the cultural inheritance of behavior creates the possibility of novel evolutionary forces. By “forces”
we mean causes of cultural change, the analogs of natural selection, mutation, drift,

and so forth in the genetic system of inheritance. These forces can lead to behavior
that would not be predicted on the basis of conventional neo-Darwinian theory.
Second, we link these models of cultural transmission to models of genetic evolution and attempt to determine the circumstances under which natural selection
might favor the modes of cultural transmission observed among contemporary
humans. These models show that the same modes of cultural transmission that lead
to novel evolutionary results can arise via conventional neo-Darwinian processes.
We call the resulting collection of models the “dual inheritance theory” of the
human evolutionary process to emphasize that the potentially novel effects of
culture result from the fact that the determinants of behavior are assumed to be
transmitted via two structurally different inheritance systems. Like most theory in
population biology, dual inheritance models are extremely simplified. Experience
with modeling complex economic and ecological systems suggests that attempts to
build realistically complicated models lead to impossible data requirements and
uninterpretable, unreliable results. Our goal is not to make quantitative predictions,

or to “show” that one or another interpretation of human evolution is correct.
Instead, we hope that dual inheritance models will clarify the logical relationships
between cultural transmission and other Darwinian processes and stimulate social
scientists to make the empirical observations that may eventually allow us to make
reliable general statements about the evolution of human behavior.

An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model

An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model

Since in the remaining chapters we will address specific problems at some length,
it is important to have the basic outline of our approach in hand before proceeding.
In the remainder of this chapter we will sketch our basic argument and then outline
what we think are the implications of this work for the social sciences.
Structure of inheritance and evolutionary forces

The first step in the argument is to clearly distinguish three concepts—genes,
culture, and environment. The relationship between the genetic system of inheritance and the environment is the least problematic of these distinctions. Our
nonbiologist readers should not be misled into thinking that the neo-Darwinian
synthesis is completely secure, for there are fundamental issues outstanding. We
are not sure how genes are assembled to produce macroscopic traits (Lewontin,
1974), nor are we certain how the generation-by-generation processes of natural
selection, drift, and so on produce the large-scale patterns of adaptation observed
in the fossil record (Gould and Lewontin,

1979). Nevertheless, compared to the

state of our understanding of culture, there is broad agreement on the mechanics of
genetic inheritance

and on how

the forces of evolution—natural

selection, re-

combination, mutation, and drift—produce changes in the frequency of genotypes
and thus the evolution of phenotypes.
These evolutionary forces result from the interaction of the structural features of
genetic inheritance with the environment. A typical evolutionary model includes
structural elements such as a specific mating system, a pattern of linkage between
loci, and rules for translating genotypes into phenotypes. It also includes environmental elements that determine which phenotypes reproduce, how population size
is regulated, and so forth.
Different inheritance structures can lead to different evolutionary forces even
when otherwise similar organisms are subjected to the same environment. For
example, the evolution of organisms that reproduce sexually is subject to forces that
do not affect the evolution of organisms that reproduce asexually. For an asexual
species the major force is selection, which acts nearly unopposed to increase the
frequency of the most fit genotype. In a sexual species the shuffling of genes during
sexual reproduction introduces the new forces of segregation and recombination.
These forces can lead to a different distribution of genotypes at equilibrium in
sexual and asexual species. Much more subtle interactions between the structure of
inheritance and the environment are possible, but the general principle remains the
same: different patterns of inheritance entail differences in the way evolutionary
processes operate.
The synthetic theory of evolution is justifiably regarded as the centerpiece of
biology. If we understand the genetic structure of a species and the environments
to which it has been exposed, the theory allows us, in principle at least, to explain
why the species is the way it is and predict how it might change if its environment
changes. Just what is meant by prediction “in principle” and why we must be
satisfied with less than lawlike statements in evolutionary biology will be explored
in the next chapter. The essential point is that the synthetic theory does permit a
deep and useful understanding of why organisms work the way they do.

3

4

Overview

The analogy between genetic and cultural inheritance
The synthetic theory is used in two ways here. First, we assume that the genetic
factors which influence human phenotypes are governed by the same forces that
affect genetic change in other species. Second, we will use the synthetic theory as
a source of analogies and formal mathematical machinery with which to build a
theory of the evolution of culture. There are important differences between the
genetic and cultural inheritance systems, and the theory will by no means neglect
them. However, the parallels are profound enough that there is no need to invent
a completely new conceptual and mathematical apparatus to deal with culture.
At the most general level the analogy is fruitful because we want the same kind
of explanation for the culturally determined components of the human behavioral
phenotype that we have for the genetically inherited adaptations of other organisms.
That is, given a knowledge of the structure of enculturation and of the expression
of socially acquired skills and ideas, and of past and present (or future) environments, we wish to explain (or predict) behavior. We want to understand how the
structural features of human cultural transmission interact with environmental contingencies to create the forces of cultural evolution. Some cultural evolutionary
forces, like natural selection, have essentially the same character in both the
cultural and genetic systems, and the analogy between genetic and cultural evolution is fruitful. Others, like the force produced by the inheritance of acquired
phenotypic adaptation, have no clear analogy in genetic evolution.
Environment, learning, and culture

All organisms appear to have mechanisms that allow them to vary their phenotypes
adaptively in response to environmental contingencies (Bonner,

1980; Staddon,

1983). The most elementary examples are the inducible enzyme systems in microorganisms. Bacteria typically have a genome that codes for several enzymes to
metabolize different organic materials, but particular enzymes are not synthesized
unless the appropriate substrates are available in the environment. Higher plants are
able to modify their phenotype to suit their local environment (Bradshaw, 1965).
In animals individual learning is an important mechanism of phenotypic adaptation.
Given a criterion of reinforcement, such as a sense of pain or a taste for rewards,

even random errors in behavior can be conditioned into elaborately organized
adaptive behaviors. Of course, many environmental contingencies may not elicit
adaptive phenotypic responses at all, or they may cause maladaptive responses
because the determinants of learning are inappropriate.
Why not simply treat culture as a special case of phenotypic response to environmental variation in which the “environment” is the behavior of conspecifics? The
reason is that cultural influences on behavior are transmitted from individual to
individual. Variants acquired by individual-learning and other common forms of
phenotypic flexibility are lost with the death of the individual, and only the genes
that underlie the capacity to learn are evolving properties of the population. In
contrast, culturally acquired variations are transmitted from generation to generation and, like genes, they are also evolving properties of the population. Because
of this we will say that culture has “population-level consequences.” The concept

An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model

5

of the population-level consequences of culture is crucial to understanding virtually
every part of this book, so we will devote quite a bit of space to it here.
“Environment” should be restricted to those processes in the physical and
biological realm that affect the population of interest but that are somehow external
to the population itself. For example, the local climate, the kinds of food items

available, and local predators are all part of the population’s environment. The
social behavior of individuals in a population is not part of the environment, even
though behavior may affect individual fitness, because it is internal to the evolving
population.
Most evolutionary models further assume that environmental conditions are not
strongly affected by evolutionary changes in the population; in other words, environmental factors are exogenous to the evolving population. For example, the
amount of rainfall in a particular location will affect virtually every aspect of the
life history of a population of plants living there, but the amount of rainfall will
itself be largely independent of the phenotypes or genotypes of that plant population. Clearly, this assumption will not always be satisfied. For example, host and
parasite populations will usually affect each other at the phenotypic and genotypic
levels. In order to make the distinction between culture and environment as stark
as possible we also initially assume that the environment is exogenous. In Chapter
3 we will see how culture can be distinguished from environmental factors that are
endogenous to the evolving system.
To see why culture should be distinguished from environment, let us diagram in
the simplest possible form the evolutionary process in a noncultural organism
(modified from Lewontin, 1974). We start with a population of zygotes just after
fertilization. The distribution of genotypes in this population of zygotes will be
denoted G,. (There could be, for example, 1 percent genotype 1, 4.3 percent
genotype 2, 63 percent genotype 3, and so on, until the frequencies sum to 100
percent.) Individuals in the population then develop mature phenotypes via various
processes, including ordinary learning. If individuals with the same genotype are
exposed to different environments, they may develop different phenotypes. That is,
through the processes of ontogeny, including ordinary learning, a given distribution
of genotypes interacts with the environment to produce a distribution of phenotypes
labeled F,. Then we could summarize the first step in the life cycle as follows:
G,

Ontogeny

F,

Since we have restricted the term “environment” to mean processes independent of
G, and F,, it can be conceptually included in the processes of ontogeny. Next, as
adults interact with their environments to gather resources for reproduction, selection acts on the population to reduce the frequency of some phenotypes and increase
the frequency of others. (We label the resulting distribution of reproductively active
adult phenotypes F/.) Selection is followed by mating, segregation, and recombination, which result in a new population of zygotes with a distribution of
genotypes G,+;. (The subscript t+1 indicates the next generation after the focal
generation, t.) The whole life cycle can be diagrammed as follows:

G,

Ontogeny

Selection

a

Mating

=

rt

6

Overview

For us the important fact about this diagram is that it can be conceptually
simplified as follows:
G, Evolutionary Forces

an

That is, we can understand the evolution of noncultural organisms as a process that
transforms the distribution of genotypes from one generation to the next, because
in a noncultural species each individual’s phenotype depends only on its genotype
and the environment in which it matures. Since the environment is independent of
G,, each genotype is associated with a fixed distribution of phenotypes. Subsequent
processes such as selection affect the population in ways that depend on the
phenotype alone. Thus as long as there is a statistically fixed association of genotypes and phenotypes, evolution can be understood in terms of genotypic change
alone.

Culture has population-level properties
Unlike other modes of adaptive phenotypic flexibility, social learning causes the
communication of phenotypic traits directly from individual to individual. This
property of social learning is important because it ensures that culture is a
population-level phenomenon. The following diagram of the evolutionary process
of a cultural species shows why (F,, F;, and G, have the same meaning as before,

and the subscript t — 1 indicates the generation before the focal generation, t):
Cultural
_Transmission |,__Selection

Fees
a

eae

F!

Cultural
_Transmission
sion

/Ontogeny
mo

a
/

To predict the distribution of postontogeny phenotypes, F,, Ha generation t
we must know what genes individuals will draw from their gene pool and how these
genes will interact with environmental contingencies, but we must also know what

cultural traits were transmitted to the new generation. Obviously, the behaviors of
two individuals with identical genotypes living in the same environment may differ
strikingly if they are brought up in different cultures. Or, in terms of the diagrams,
to predict F, one must know G,, the state of the environment, and the distribution
of phenotypes in the previous generations, F/_,. Unlike the environment, however,

the distribution of phenotypes is not exogenous to the ongoing evolution of the
population. Therefore, any model of the evolutionary process of a cultural organism must keep track of the evolution of the distribution of phenotypes as well
as the distribution of genotypes:
Evolutionary

ie)
G,

Forces

—___§_— >

Fis
Gis

An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model

7

That is, the evolution of a cultural organism is a process that transforms the joint
distribution of genotypes and phenotypes. Put another way, phenotypic characters
acquired via social learning can be thought of as a pool of cultural traits that
coevolves with the gene pool in a way that characters acquired through ordinary
learning without culture do not. Social learning causes the acquisition of phenotypes to be a population-level phenomenon.
This does not mean that cultures have mysterious lives of their own that cause
them to evolve independently of the individuals of which they are composed. As
in the case of genetic evolution, individuals are the primary locus of the evolutionary forces that cause cultural evolution, and in modeling cultural evolution we
will focus on observable events in the lives of individuals. To understand the
evolution of a cultural organism like Homo sapiens, we must understand the forces
that affect the frequencies of different culturally transmitted phenotypes as well as
the forces that affect the frequencies of different genotypes.
The structural properties of human cultural inheritance
Given a cultural system of inheritance based on social learning, the key problem
is to understand its population-level consequences. Different structures of cultural
inheritance will lead to different forces in cultural evolution, just as different
structures of the genetic system lead to different forces in genetic evolution. For
example, culture conceivably could have a pattern of transmission that makes it
nearly an exact analog of genes insofar as evolutionary processes are concerned.
Suppose that young individuals acquire certain behaviors from their parents, with
each parent having the same expected effect on a given offspring’s behavior.
Further, suppose that the phenotypic copying is nearly error-free and that individuals retain traits acquired during childhood for life. Although the biochemical basis
of such a system would be utterly different from that of genes, this difference would
not have a dramatic effect on the evolutionary dynamics of the trait. The cultural
system would behave like an extra genetic locus for all but the most technical
considerations. The cultural evolution of humans is problematic precisely because
the structure of cultural inheritance is often quite different from that of genetic
inheritance.
What, then, are the structural differences between genetic and cultural inheri-

tance?
1. The cultural “mating system’ is different from its genetic analog. Every
human society allocates roles in the enculturation process to individuals other than
the two genetic parents. Members of an extended family frequently are very
important, status as a teacher or priest may confer a formal role in socialization,
prestigious individuals may be important, and so forth. Nor are the contributions
of the biological father and mother to enculturation always so nearly equivalent as
they are in genetic transmission. Either mothers or fathers may play a disproportionately important role in transmitting some cultural traits. We shall give the
term “cultural parents” or “models” to the set of individuals who enculturate a given
person. (We will use the terms “cultural offspring” or “naive individuals” for those
who acquire traits by cultural transmission.) The possibility of having more and
different people act as cultural parents than is the case in genetic transmission can

8

Overview

lead to evolutionary effects that are strikingly different from those expected with
purely genetic inheritance.
2. The cultural “generation length” is variable. The time scale of cultural evolution may be either shorter or longer than a biological generation. Individuals do
not necessarily acquire all cultural characters from their parents or from members
of the parental generation and do not in turn pass on cultural items only to children.
Rather, the behavior of any individual can be copied—adults may copy adults and
children may imitate other children. Sometimes older individuals may even imitate
younger ones. Following Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981) we will call such
transmission within generations “horizontal.” Horizontal transmission is analogous
in some ways to the transmission of a pathogen, and Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman
have used epidemiological models as a starting point for their development of
theory. The item of culture being spread horizontally acts like a microbe that
reproduces and spreads rapidly because it is “infective” and has a short generation
length compared to the biological generation length of the “host.” Fads and fashions
and technical innovations are familiar examples.
3. Individuals are at least partly developed when they are enculturated. Cultural
transmission

occurs

after birth, and even

infants

are mentally

active,

sentient

individuals. Further, culture is acquired sequentially over time, rather than all at
once at a single moment in the life cycle. These two structural differences cause the
transmission of culture to be quite unlike that of genes. First, the existence of an
active individual at the time of cultural transmission means that (1) genetic mech-

anisms can affect the probability of acquiring different cultural variants and (2)
cultural traits acquired at one age can affect the cultural acquisition of traits at a later
age. The only analog of these phenomena in genetic transmission is a process that
geneticists call “meiotic drive,” which apparently has not been an important force
in genetic evolution. Second, both the set of cultural parents involved in transmission and the cultural generation time of cultural traits acquired at different ages
can differ substantially. For example, during early childhood most traits in most
cultures will be acquired from biological parents or other close relatives, while at
later ages many traits may be acquired from peers via horizontal transmission.
4. Culture is acquired by directly copying the phenotype. The cultural information
acquired by an individual may be affected by the events of his or her life, and, if
so, the changes will be transmitted to an individual’s cultural offspring. This
property of cultural transmission makes for a kind of “Lamarckian” evolution, in
the sense that acquired variation is inherited. In contrast, the genetic information
transmitted by an individual is unaffected by the events of its life, and adaptive
genetic evolution can only occur by the differential survival or reproduction of
variant individuals in the population.
The forces of cultural evolution

The next question is, What evolutionary forces can be generated by the interaction
between the cultural system of inheritance and the environment? This is not the
point at which to judge which forces are more important or exactly how one force

An Informal Sketch of the Dual Inheritance Model

9

is linked to another. These are the questions that will occupy us for most of the
book. At this stage, we simply want to enumerate all of the conceivable processes
that can change culture through time.
1. Random variation. We all have had the experience of misremembering even
important items of information. The neurological machinery of the mind must
certainly cause errors at some rate. We can be confident that the cultural analog of
mutation exists. A measurement of the error rate conceivably could be devised. For
example,

such a measure

could be based on the rate at which an oral tradition

corrupts the facts of a historical event known and datable from an independent
source. Our intuition is that the rate of cultural mutation is much higher than the
rate of genetic mutation. If this is so, accidental variation may play a somewhat
different role in cultural evolution than it does in genetic evolution.
2. An analog of genetic drift. If the population of models active in cultural
transmission is small, chance variations in which cultural variants are observed and

remembered may cause substantial changes in frequency from time to time. Rare
or rarely performed variants may be lost entirely. Diamond (1978) reviews evidence that the isolated Tasmanians lost many traits brought with them from Australia by this mechanism. Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981) incorporate drift effects
into several of their mathematical models.

3. The force of guided variation. Like many other organisms, humans adjust their
phenotypes in response to their environments through learning and rational calculation. Unlike most other organisms, humans can culturally transmit the phenotypes
so acquired to the next generation. Thus ordinary learning in combination with
cultural transmission acts to create a kind of “Lamarckian” effect that increases the
frequency of traits that are generated by the learning process. Both trial-and-error
learning and more elaborate methods of adaptive modification of behavior based on
rational calculation are almost certainly very important forces in human cultural
evolution, and we will devote Chapter 4 to trying to understand how they might
work.
The effect of the guided variation force on evolution depends on the existence
of some adaptive standard such as taste or a sensation of pleasure or pain. For
example, adaptation through rational calculation proceeds by the collection of information about the environment, the estimation of the results of various alternative

patterns of behavior, and the evaluation of the desirability of the alternative outcomes according to some criteria. It is these guiding criteria that translate variation
in the environment into a directional, often adaptive, change in phenotype, which
then is culturally transmitted to subsequent generations. The source of these criteria
clearly must ultimately be external to the guided variation process itself. In the final
analysis, we will be driven to explain the guiding criteria as the product of some
other process. This peculiar property of guided variation will become particularly
important when we examine the application of sociobiological theory to human
behavior in the context of dual inheritance theory.

4. Biased transmission. This force arises because the process of cultural transmission itself can favor some cultural variants over others. Biased transmission 1s

10

Overview

closely akin to guided variation because both forces arise from the same capacities
for learning and calculation. However, the forces arising from biased transmission
are more complex than guided variation. We can conceive of three different kinds
of biased transmission, each with different effects on cultural evolution.

In the simplest case, people may adopt some cultural variants rather than others
based on their judgments about the properties of the variants themselves. We call
this “direct bias.” The enculturation of dietary preferences is a useful example.
Parents know that it is easier to teach small children to eat some kinds of foods than
others. Ice cream and candy are easy; spicy foods are hard. It seems likely that these
childhood preferences have a genetic basis (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 38-43).
By the time we are adults we have culturally acquired many preferences for food,
including preferences that violate our genetically acquired tastes (peppery foods
that cause painful sensations) and a host of seemingly arbitrary culture-specific
preferences that determine dietary change in later life. Anglo-Americans prefer
beef and pork and abhor dog, horsemeat, and fermented fish. Other cultures reverse
these preferences. At all ages the decision to include novel food items in the diet
will be influenced by some kind of preference. This directly biased transmission
will then serve to increase the frequency of the preferred variants. We will devote
Chapter 5 to trying to understand the effects of directly biased transmission in more
detail.
More subtle kinds of biases are also possible. The tendency of an individual to
acquire a particular cultural variant may be influenced by the commonness or rarity
of the trait among that individual’s cultural parents. Wé call this “frequency dependent bias.” For example, a body of literature in social psychology (e.g. Keisler
and Keisler, 1970) suggests that people are prone to adopt the opinions of the
majority, even when such opinions are contradicted by their own experience. This
tendency leads to an increase in the frequency of the most common cultural variant
in a population. We will see in Chapter 7 that this phenomenon has interesting
ramifications.
It is also conceivable that the possession of certain traits may cause an individual
to be an attractive model for a wide variety of otherwise unrelated traits. For
example, prestigious, powerful, or wealthy individuals are often attractive models,
and we imitate their style of dress, their pattern of speech, and a variety of other
traits that at first glance do not appear to be related to their attainment of prestige,
power, or wealth. Thus, people may tend to acquire some cultural variants because
they are associated with attractive variants of entirely different cultural traits. We
will refer to this as “indirect bias.” Among other things, indirectly biased transmission can cause an unstable “runaway” process analogous to the genetical process that is thought to account for maladaptively exaggerated male characters (e.g.
peacocks’ tails) in polygynous species. We will investigate the effects of this kind
of indirect bias in Chapter 8.
It has been argued that directly biased transmission is the dominant force governing human evolution. Eugene Ruyle (1973), for example, has argued that
human
evolution is governed by the search for satisfaction. As with guided variation,

however, the problem with this kind of explanation is the source of
the criteria of

satisfaction, and once again one will be driven to explain the guiding criteria
as the
product of some other force or forces.

The Relationship between Genetic and Cultural Evolution

11

5. Natural selection can operate on culture. Donald Campbell (1965, 1975) has
argued that natural selection is a very general mechanism, one likely to operate on
any system of inheritance. Darwin’s original reasoning was that if inherited variation exists, and if this inherited information is an important determinant of the
ability of organisms to survive and reproduce in a given environment, then variants
that enhance survival and reproduction relative to other variants will increase in the
population in question. Since cultural variants are inherited and many, if not all,
culturally acquired behaviors have an effect on human survival and reproduction
(both genetic and cultural), some cultural variants will increase relative to others.

Like Campbell, we believe that the empirically known properties of culture
virtually guarantee that cultural variation is subject to natural selection. We will
elaborate on this reasoning and review some of the relevant empirical data in
Chapters 5 and 6.
Natural selection occupies an important place in our analysis because it can
cause the results of cultural evolution to diverge systematically from the predictions
of ordinary Darwinian theory. We have already seen how guided variation and
biased transmission are dependent on some external process for their criteria of
differential retention or transmission. Natural selection acting on genetic variation
is an obvious candidate for this process.
Natural selection acting on cultural variation can cause the evolution of different
behaviors from those one would expect as a result of selection acting on genetic
variation when the pattern of cultural transmission is different from the structure of
genetic transmission. If such structural differences exist, the behavior that enables
an individual to maximize his chance to enculturate cultural offspring may not be
the behavior that will maximize the transmission of genes to the next generation.
For example, natural selection acting on culturally transmitted variation can conceivably favor behaviors through which an individual mobilizes the resources
available to him to achieve a social role like “teacher” or “influential citizen.” Such
a role may confer prestige and a high probability of being imitated by “cultural
offspring,” at some cost in number of biological offspring.
We will say that two different inheritance systems are “symmetric” in structure
if they have similar life cycles. For example, equal cultural transmission by both
genetic parents to young children is symmetric to autosomal genetic transmission.
Horizontal cultural transmission during adulthood is “asymmetric” with respect to
both genetic transmission and cultural transmission from parents to children at an
early age. If two inheritance systems are symmetric then it is likely that natural
selection will favor the same phenotypic variants, regardless of how they are
inherited. In contrast, when two inheritance systems are asymmetric, natural selection may favor one variant if the trait is transmitted by one system of inheritance
and a different variant if the trait is transmitted by the other. For example, the traits
favored in an adolescent prestige system with horizontal transmission may be quite
different from those favored in the vertical transmission system from parents.

The Relationship between Genetic and Cultural Evolution
The theoretical approach described so far is useful because it provides a systematic
framework for addressing a wide variety of questions about human behavior. Our

12

Overview

goal is to account for all the processes by which the distribution of beliefs, attitudes,
and values in a population are transmitted and modified. Understanding how these
processes give rise to forces of cultural change allows us to link social, ecological,
and psychological processes which act on individuals to large-scale and long-term
patterns of behavior. Given detailed assumptions about the structure of cultural
transmission and the nature of the social and natural environment, the theory allows
predictions about the kinds of culturally transmitted behaviors that should characterize a particular population.
To understand the evolution of human behavior, however, it is not sufficient to

know how the existing structures of human cultural transmission give rise to
cultural change; we must also understand why human cultural transmission has
these structures. To see why, suppose that guided variation, individual learning
plus the imitation of learned behavior, is the only force affecting a particular
culturally transmitted trait. The nature of the cultural variants favored by guided
variation depends on the psychological criteria that determine how culturally acquired behavior is modified by learning. Given adequate empirical knowledge of
the psychology of learning, we could predict which cultural variants would be
common in any particular environment. This sort of understanding may be useful
in many contexts. However, we would not yet understand why some variants and
not others are favored by learning and therefore by guided variation. To understand
the evolution of human behavior, we must understand how the structure of cultural

transmission that is characteristic of humans might have evolved.
Most theorists in the social sciences do not feel any need to understand how the
structures and processes that they posit might have evolved. We believe that this
is a Serious error. Ultimately, the human sciences must be unified with the physical
and biological ones. The psychological factors which affect contemporary human
behavior are products of organic evolution. Any theory of human behavior must be
consistent with what we know about evolution in general and the evolution of
behavior in particular.

The human sociobiologist’s view of culture
The adherents of one school of thought, which we will call “human sociobiology,”
have tried to develop a theory of cultural evolution which is derived from the
Darwinian theory of organic evolution. During the last two decades, evolutionary
biologists have developed a subtle and, at least according to its practitioners,
successful theory for explaining the evolution of animal social behavior, commonly
referred to as sociobiological theory. A variety of biologists and social scientists
have attempted to use sociobiological theory to understand human behavior (e.g.

Wilson, 1978; Alexander,

1979a; Chagnon and Irons, 1979; Symons,

1979; Van

den Berghe, 1979). Because human sociobiology represents the only really serious
attempt to date to develop a logically complete theory of human behavior that is
consistent with what we know about organic evolution, we frequently will compare
its results with our own.
The most basic tenet of sociobiological theory is that we can usually predict the
kinds of behavior observed in a particular ecological and social setting by deter-

The Relationship between Genetic and Cultural Evolution

13

mining the behavior that maximizes individual inclusive fitness in that setting, or
at least in some relevant setting in the past. Individual inclusive fitness is a measure
of an individual’s reproductive success that includes the effect of an individual’s
behavior on its genetic relatives. For synthetic reviews of this theory and the
supporting empirical evidence, see Wilson (1975) or Krebs and Davies (1981).

Human sociobiologists make predictions about patterns of human behavior by
assuming that human behavior tends to maximize inclusive fitness. For example,
several authors have asked why some societies are characterized by matrilineal
social organization. Using sociobiological theory, they hypothesize that subsistence technologies or residence patterns that cause males to be uncertain about
the paternity of any particular child should lead to matrilineal social organization
(Greene,

1978; Alexander,

1979a: 159-176; Kurland,

1979).

Many social scientists have argued that sociobiological theory is not applicable
to human behavior because human behavior is culturally acquired and therefore is
somehow decoupled from genetic evolution. To answer these critics, human sociobiologists use a version of the deductive argument that we attributed to Darwin at
the beginning of this chapter (e.g. Alexander, 1979a; Irons, 1979a): social learning
is another form of phenotypic plasticity, just like individual learning in noncultural
animals. The primate lineage that led to humans was almost certainly at some point
acultural; as the capacities to acquire and transmit culture evolved in the lineage,
natural selection must have acted on them to tend to maximize inclusive fitness.
Human sociobiologists differ over exactly how culture is kept on the
fitness-maximizing “straight and narrow.” Some, like Alexander (1979a) or Irons
(1979a), deny that culture as we have defined it is important; human behavior can

be understood in terms of learning and rational calculation based on genetically
inherited preferences. Others, like Durham (1978), believe that culture is important
in determining human behavior but that over the long run the forces of guided
variation, biased transmission, and natural selection act to make genetically adaptive cultural variants more common than other cultural variants. Many others
simply ignore the fact that behavior is culturally transmitted in the human species.
In essence, human sociobiologists believe that it is not necessary to take the
details of cultural transmission into account when predicting human behavior. The
organic origin of the human capacity for culture under the influence of natural
selection acting on genes guarantees that, however it may work in detail, culture
will usually enhance genetic fitness. This argument, which we will refer to as “the
argument from natural origins,” is common in evolutionary biology. If we want to
predict the foraging patterns of a bird species in a particular habitat, we try to
determine which strategy maximizes fitness in a given ecological setting. Usually,
the evolutionary ecologist argues, it is not necessary to understand the neurophysiology or the learning mechanisms that characterize the species in detail to
make useful predictions about its foraging behavior.
The argument from natural origins is a potent defense of human sociobiology.
As critics within biology have pointed out, there are a number of reasons that the
behavior (or any other phenotypic trait) of any particular species, including humans, may diverge from predictions based on what is adaptive (see Gould and
Lewontin, 1979). Evolutionary accidents may occur, changes in one character may

affect other characters, and populations may not have reached an evolutionary

14

Overview

equilibrium. But most critics of the “adaptationist program” would admit that
behavior generally tends to be adaptive. Unless the existence of cultural transmission makes human evolution fundamentally different from the evolution of
other animals, sociobiological theory is likely to provide a useful source of hypotheses about human behavior. To deny the relevance of sociobiological theory to
human behavior, one must either attack neo-Darwinian theory as a whole (not a

promising enterprise) or be prepared to show how models that take culture into
account actually generate more satisfactory hypotheses about human behavior
without violating the assumption of natural origins. That the latter can be done is
an argument we will defend repeatedly.

Inheritance as a shortcut to individual learning
Unlike human sociobiologists, we believe that the details of cultural transmission
are likely to be essential to an understanding of the evolution of human behavior.
The fact that culture is an inheritance system means that a variety of evolutionary
forces affect behavior. Some of these forces can increase the frequency of behaviors
that are genetically maladaptive. The capacity for cultural transmission can nonetheless persist because its, probably considerable, adaptive advantages also result
from the fact that culture is an inheritance system, and therefore a cultural population can respond to weak evolutionary forces that act over many generations. If
this view is correct, it means that understanding human evolution properly proceeds
in two steps: First we determine how the costs and benefits of cultural transmission,
averaged over many traits, have shaped its structure in humans, and then, taking

this structure as given, we investigate how the forces of cultural evolution influence
particular behavioral traits in different social and ecological settings.
In a variable environment, it is clearly useful to be able to develop the locally
adaptive phenotype. But how does the organism determine what that phenotype
might be? There are many ways, but in most species these processes share the same
general features. The organism inherits criteria that determine what feels good and
what feels bad; feelings of security and satiation are good, and feelings of fear and
hunger are bad. It also inherits generalized behavior patterns and modes of learning;
quail associate gastric distress with foods that are visually novel, while rats associate the same symptoms with foods that taste novel. The organism tries a variety of
behaviors and retains those which are associated with rewarding sensations. In this
way, complex patterns of behavior appropriate to local conditions c27 ' zenerated.
Individual learning of this kind can be costly and error prone. Learning trials
occupy time and energy that could be allocated to other components of fitness, and
may entail a considerable risk to the individual as well. Because of these costs, the
investment of individuals in determining the locally favored behavior must be
limited, and individual learning can lead to errors. Individuals may fail to discover
an adaptive behavior, or a maladaptive one may be retained because it was reinforced by chance. When these costs are important, selection ought te favor shortcuts to learning—ways that an organism can achieve phenotypic flexibility without
paying the full cost of learning.
Cultural inheritance is adaptive because it is such a shortcut. If the locally
adaptive behavior is more common than other behaviors, imitation provides an

The Relationship between Genetic and Cultural Evolution

15

inexpensive way to acquire it. If the environment is not too variable, modest
amounts of individual learning combined with cultural transmission lead to forces
of guided variation and bias that are strong enough to cause available models
generally to have adaptive skills. In this way, a cultural population can adapt to
local conditions with a much smaller investment in learning than an acultural
population.
To make this argument more concrete, consider the evolution of cultural transmission in a hypothetical population of acultural organisms in a temporally varying
environment. In each generation, individuals modify their behavior through individual learning; on average, individuals develop behavior that is adaptive in the
current environment, but because some individuals make errors, there is individual

variation. Now, consider the evolution of a hypothetical mutant “imitator” gene
that causes its bearers to eschew individual learning and copy the behavior of
individuals from the previous generation. As long as the environment does not
change too much between generations, the average behavior of these models will
be close to the currently adaptive behavior. By copying behavior of individuals
from the previous generation, imitators avoid costly learning trials, and, if they

average over a number of models, have a better chance of acquiring the currently
adaptive behavior than non-imitators. Thus, the imitator gene seems likely to
spread when it is rare. As the imitator gene increases in frequency, however, more
individuals will acquire their behavior by imitation. This will cause the population
to track the changing environment less effectively and thus reduce the advantage
of the imitator genotype. Eventually an equilibrium will be reached in which both
imitators and non-imitators are present. If individual learning is sufficiently costly,
and the environment not too variable, it seems plausible that imitators might
predominate at equilibrium. Such a population would be adapted to the current
environment even though only a small fraction engaged in individual learning.
This model is clearly artificial. A more realistic model would allow genetic
modifiers to control the relative importance of individual and social learning in
determining the behavior of each individual. In Chapter 4 we will show that such
a model leads to qualitative conclusions like those of the simple model described
here: selection favors increasing the importance of social learning in determining
individual behavior relative to that of individual learning because social learning is
a less costly way of acquiring the locally adaptive phenotype. As individual learning becomes less important, the population tracks the environment less effectively.
Social learning can continue to be effective because a cultural population can
respond to relatively weak forces that act over many generations.
There may also be circumstances that make it more profitable for an individual
to imitate nonparental individuals than to imitate his or her genetic parents. For
example, offspring frequently must emigrate. Individuals native to the new habitat
are likely to be much better models than the immigrant’s biological parents. Let us
suppose that the structure of cultural transmission is affected by genetically transmitted traits. Then we might expect selection to favor an asymmetric system of
cultural inheritance, again in order to reduce the costs of individual learning.
Selection acting on such an asymmetric system can favor genetically disadvantageous behaviors, but as long as the effect of nonparental transmission, averaged
over all the behaviors transmitted, is favorable, asymmetric transmission can
evolve.

16

Overview

Selection could lead to cultural transmission that is biased in such a way that the
forces due to transmission bias would counteract those due to selection acting on
the asymmetric system of cultural transmission. Why doesn’t it? An anthropomorphic answer to this question is that genes have to “know” what phenotype is
favored by selection in any particular environment in order to bias cultural transmission in that phenotype’s favor. However, genes have no way of “knowing” the
relative fitness of different phenotypes in a local habitat without acquiring information through some process like trial-and-error learning. But we have supposed that
cultural transmission is favored precisely because it allows individuals to avoid at
least some of the costs of learning and calculating for themselves.
The same general argument applies to all the structural differences between
genetic and cultural inheritance. A particular form of social learning may allow an
individual to avoid the costs associated with independently evaluating the adaptiveness of alternative behaviors. Structural features such as an asymmetric life cycle,
frequency dependent bias, and indirect bias may make it more likely that the
offspring acquires an adaptive phenotype, but they also introduce novel evolutionary forces that make it impossible to understand behavior directly from the
postulate of inclusive fitness maximization. So long as the net effect of social
learning is positive, it can be favored by selection. At the same time, the resulting
processes can cause particular behaviors or even whole suites of behaviors to
diverge radically from the predictions of sociobiological theory.
This claim is stronger than the statement that different behaviors interact to affect
fitness. Consider the following analogy. Biologists trying to understand the
evolution of social behavior commonly take the nature of the genetic system as
given, even though it can have crucial effects on the kind of social behavior a species
has evolved. For example, some arthropods are “haplodiploid,” meaning that
females have two sets of chromosomes and males only one. Sociobiological theory
suggests that haplodiploidy makes it more likely that altruistic cooperation will
evolve between sisters (see Hamilton, 1972). Biologists trying to understand why
haplodiploidy evolved from ordinary diploid ancestors should account for its
“deleterious” effect on the cooperative behavior of sisters, along with all of its other
effects. On the other hand, biologists trying to understand the evolution of social
behavior in a particular species of wasp can take the genetic system as given
because the time scale of evolution of the genetic system is much longer than the
time scale of evolution of ordinary phenotypic characters like social behavior.
The evolution of the structure of cultural transmission in humans is analogous
to the evolution of the genetic system. Changes in the structure of cultural transmission simultaneously affect all the characters that are culturally transmitted. If we

want to understand the evolution of the structure of cultural inheritance itself, we
have to average over all these effects. On the other hand, if we want to understand

the evolution of social behavior in humans, we take the structure of the cultural
inheritance system as fixed.

The General Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory
From the perspective of an evolutionary biologist, the relationship between
genes
and culture appears to be the most interesting scientific problem presented
by

Conclusion

17

human evolution, and this explains our preoccupation with the question. From the
perspective of most social scientists, the relationship between genes and culture is
of secondary interest. We believe that dual inheritance theory can be fruitfully
applied to many other problems in the social sciences. To illustrate its utility, we
use the models to address three other basic questions:
1. What is the relationship between ecological and evolutionary processes?
Social scientists sometimes view synchronic and diachronic explanations as competing. More commonly, they are held to be complementary, but the mechanisms
linking contemporary and historical causes are left quite vague. Dual inheritance
theory accounts for historical effects through the cultural transmission process and
for ecological ones through the forces that act on culture within one generation.
Thus synchronic and diachronic explanations are aspects of the same causal processes in this system.
2. What is the relationship between individuals and society? This problem has
generated a series of longstanding controversies. Methodological individualists
(e.g. most economists), conflict theorists (e.g. Marxists, who emphasize the role
of social classes), and macrofunctionalists (e.g. the followers of Durkheim in

sociology and anthropology) identify different fundamental units of analysis and
reach very different conclusions on this question. In our theory, the individual is
linked to larger units by cultural transmission and its population-level properties.
What this linkage implies for what behavior we can expect (e.g. should the function
of behavior be interpreted at the individual or group level) turns out to depend on
the details of evolutionary processes.
3. What is the role of symbols in human evolution? Much of human behavior
consists of the use and production of symbols—language, art, religious ritual, and
the like. No agreement has been reached whether or not such behavior can be
explained in terms of functional theories. We can address this problem with models
of the indirect bias force. Its runaway process can cause functional traits to become
symbols.
In each case, dual inheritance theory clarifies these questions by formulating
them in terms of explicit evolutionary models. Even though the models are far from
complete solutions, they improve understanding of the logic of the problems and
suggest what kinds of observations and measurements, and additional theory, are
required for more definitive answers. We believe that many other problems of
interest to students of human behavior can be similarly clarified by the construction
of appropriate models of cultural evolution.
Conclusion

Throughout this book, we are concerned with two related theoretical questions:
First, how do the structural features of cultural inheritance observed in contemporary humans produce observed patterns of human behavior? Second, are these
structural features conceivably genetically adaptive? Our answers to these questions

make it more difficult to apply the sociobiologists’ argument from natural origins:
If acquiring information by individual effort is costly compared to acquisition by
social learning, an explicit theory of the mechanisms of cultural evolution may be

18

Overview

necessary. At the same time, however, our results may provide novel explanations
for otherwise puzzling patterns of human behavior. It has not been possible to solve
the more interesting empirical questions definitively: Is an explicit theory of the
mechanisms of cultural evolution necessary? And, if so, what exactly should it be

like? However, a deductive theory which clearly sets out the logical relationships
between genetic and cultural evolution does advance our understanding of such
problems by more clearly showing what is at issue in controversies, such as those
between human sociobiologists and their critics, which otherwise appear to be the
result of irreconcilable “philosophical” differences. Our objective is to construct as
wide a variety of simple hypotheses as seem logically sound and consistent with the
available imperfect evidence. Present theory and data demand a considerable agnosticism about the various conventional explanations for human behavior and
evolution, but dual inheritance models do suggest a compelling program for theoretical and empirical investigations that can eventually provide satisfactory explanations.

2
Some Methodological
Preliminaries
I am a firm believer that without speculation there is no good and original
observation.
Charles Darwin in a letter to A. R. Wallace, 1857
(Brent, 1981: 409)

False facts are highly injurious to the progress of science, for they often endure
long; but false views, if supported by some evidence, do little harm as every
one takes a salutary pleasure in proving their falseness; and when this is done,

one path toward error is closed and the road to truth is often at the same time
opened.
Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man (1871: II-385)

Charles Darwin was less than completely candid about the relationship between his
theories and the many experiments and observations he used to support them.
Sometimes he seems to have endorsed the inductive philosophy of science that was
conventional in his day: first observe, then extract theories from the observations.
For example, in The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals (1872) he claims,

“T arrived at these three Principles only at the close of my observations.” As
Howard Gruber (1974) has noted, however, all three principles are present in
Darwin’s M and N notebooks, which date from 1838. On other occasions, Darwin
defended the more modern view that, without theory, fruitful observation is un-

likely, that we must hypothesize in order to observe. Whatever his published views,
Darwin’s notebooks leave little doubt that as a working scientist he was an avid
theorizer who more than once first developed a theory and then searched for
evidence to support it.
This book is primarily about theory. It is based on the assumption that culture
can be profitably viewed as a system of inheritance. Then we try to imagine how
the observable events in the lives of individuals lead to the increase of some
culturally transmitted variants and the decrease of others. To help answer these
questions we have borrowed a style of mathematical theorizing, and many specific
models, from contemporary evolutionary biology. Experience has taught us that
many social scientists will find various aspects of this kind of theorizing confusing
and objectionable. To some it seems too reductionistic, to others too simplified, and
to still others reminiscent of either Social Darwinism or genetic determinism. In this
chapter we briefly digress to defend our approach against these objections.
19

20

Some Methodological Preliminaries

Darwinian Approach

We seek to develop models of cultural evolution which can link two kinds of
observable phenomena, the macroscopic patterns of behavior that characterize
societies and cultures and the microscopic details of the lives of individuals. Our
goal is to understand how the day-to-day and generation-to-generation repetition of
processes we can observe on the small scale can cause large-scale and long-run
patterns of behavior within and between societies. Key among the assumptions in
these models is that the transmission of culture in humans.constitutes a system of
inheritance. We introduced this idea in Chapter 1 and will defend it at length in
Chapter 3. Here we will say only that humans acquire attitudes, beliefs, and other
kinds of information from others by social learning and that these items of cultural
information affect individual behavior. To understand the macroscopic patterns of
social behavior, the theory must explain how the events in the lives of individuals
change the frequency of different culturally transmitted beliefs and attitudes.
This approach to understanding the evolution of cultural organisms is analogous
to the approach that Darwin first used to account for organic evolution. The basic
element of Darwin’s approach was the assumption that organisms inherit information that, in combination with the local environment, determines their phenotype.
To understand why a population was characterized by some phenotypes and not
others, he asked what processes in the lives of individuals increased the frequency
of some variants relative to others. Ultimately, he came to believe that natural
selection and the inheritance of acquired variation were the most important. Contemporary biologists reject the inheritance of acquired variation as an important
factor in evolutionary change, and, based on a knowledge of genetics, they have
added other forces such as segregation and recombination. Nonetheless, they have
retained Darwin’s basic approach to understanding the evolution of noncultural
organisms.
Assuming that culture is a system of inheritance, it seems likely that Darwin’s
approach will be useful for understanding cultural change for the same reason that
it provided the key to understanding organic evolution: it directs our attention to
accounting for all the important processes that affect that variation carried through
time by a succession of individuals. Today’s cultural traditions are the result of
cumulative changes made by past and present bearers of them. To understand why
cultural traditions have the form that they do, we need to account for the processes
that increase the frequency of some cultural variants and reduce that of others. Why
do some individuals change traditions? Or invent new behaviors? Why are some
variants transmitted, while others are not? Why do many variants remain rare or
never occur at all? Answering such questions is the objective of our theory.
Recursion models

Like many of the models in evolutionary biology, all of the mathematical models
presented in this book will be what are called “recursion equations.” The form of
these models provides an especially clear illustration of how we will connect
assumptions about the nature of enculturation and life history of individuals with
the larger-scale phenomena of cultural evolution.

Darwinian Approach

21

The first step in building a recursion model of evolution is to specify a life cycle
for the organism under consideration. For some trait we might wish to study, the
following simplified life cycle of a cultural organism might suffice.
Other
roles

Other
roles

Social

Individual

learning

learning

Parents ——————>

Genetic
transmission

Children ——————>.

Selection
Adolescents ——

—

Parents

Development

Zygotes

During the course of a single generation, various events occur in the lives of
individuals in the population. Genetic transmission creates zygotes that develop
into children who are enculturated by a set of individuals who typically occupy
certain social roles. For example, for many cultural traits the biological parents
typically play the most important roles in enculturation. In other cases, individuals
occupying social roles such as grandmother, teacher, or priest may be important in
enculturation. Children acquire some behaviors and modify others as they mature
into adolescents. The result is a population of adolescents and young adults who
interact with the physical and social environment. Some of these young adults
acquire the resources necessary for cultural and/or genetic transmission.
The next step is to describe what happens to individuals in a population during
each step of the life cycle. Some individuals will carry one genetic or cultural
variant, some another, and often variants will differ in what happens to them at

different stages of the life cycle. Consider two cultural variants, one placing a high
value on domesticity, the other a low value—homebodies and hellraisers, respectively. We can begin constructing the model by starting anywhere in the life
cycle, say with the events of social learning. How do children acquire a disposition
to be homebodies or hellraisers? One of the simplest ways would be just to imitate
one genetic parent or the other at random. If so,
Number of homebodies
among children in
generation t
Number of homebodies

= (1/2)

among parents of
generation t — 1

Average number of

x | children per homebody
parent

The equation is multiplied by one-half because each child has two parents and so
each parent will, given our assumed rule of transmission, on average transmit the
trait to half of them. The equation describing the socialization process for hellraisers is very similar:

22

Some Methodological Preliminaries

Number of hellraisers

among children in
generation t

Number of hellraisers

= (1/2)

Average number of

among parents of | X { children per hellraiser
generation t — 1

parent

We can simplify the model considerably, without sacrificing anything for most
purposes, by keeping track of frequencies or proportions of the variants instead of
the numbers:
Number of homebodies
Proportion of homebodies
among children in
generation t

among children
in generation t

Total number of homebody
and hellraiser children in

generation t

Since the proportion of hellraisers is just (1 — the proportion of homebodies) at this
or any other stage of the life cycle, we only need an equation for one of the two
types to specify the model completely.
Next, children mature to become adolescents. During this period many things
happen, the most important of which might be that adolescents sample the pleasures
of life; some children who began adolescence with a cultural disposition to become
homebodies discover that hellraising is fun and switch, and vice versa. Keeping
explicit track only of the proportion of homebodies now,
Proportion of
pny Rares
among adole- |=
ee
generation t

a“

Proportion of
homebodies
among children
in generation t

Probability that
homebodies
stay
homebodies

Proportion of
hellraisers
among children
in generation t

Probability that
hellraisers
become
homebodies

Next, adolescents mature into adults who will be the parents of the next, t + ie

generation. Perhaps homebodies
becoming parents:

and hellraisers have different probabilities of

Proportion of
Probability that
homebodies among
a homebody
:
dolescents in
becomes
Proportion of home5
.
bodies among parents | = OR
ey
in generation t
is probability that a member
of generation t becomes a parent

Finally, by combining all of these steps, we obtain a model of events during one
generation that influence the first stage of the next. This complete equation describing the events during one complete generation is called a recursion.

Darwinian Approach

23

Recursions capture the nature of the evolutionary process on a microscopic time
scale. The objective, however, is to predict the longer-run course of evolution. To
accomplish this the equation is iterated recursively, stepped forward from generation to generation to determine how the frequency of different variants changes
through time, and perhaps reaches some equilibrium, a value at which the frequency of the two variants becomes constant. Thus we can ask: Will the frequency
of homebodies increase from the level maintained by chance development to almost
100 percent? Or will the frequency of homebodies stabilize at some intermediate
value, say, one-half?
We say that distinct processes which cause the frequency of different cultural
variants to change are forces. In this illustrative model, three forces are in operation, one resulting from life-style choice during adolescence, one from the different tendency of the variants to become parents, and one from the difference in the
expected number of children raised by each variant. Some of the forces may
increase the frequency of homebodies (homebodies may be more likely to become
parents and have more children), and others may decrease it (more homebodies may
learn to be hellraisers than vice versa).

Levels of explanation
The adherents of some schools of thought in the social sciences hold that to
understand societies we must begin by understanding individual psychology and its
effect on behavior. Large-scale social patterns are seen as the aggregate result of
individual behavior. The otherwise diverse theories of Anglo-American economists, behavioral psychologists, and exchange theorists in both sociology and
anthropology all share this general “reductionistic” approach. The members of
other schools of thought hold that “the determining cause of a social fact should be
sought among the social facts preceding it and not among the states of individual
consciousness” (Durkheim,

1938 [1895]: 110). By this they mean that we should

seek explanations for large-scale patterns in terms of causal processes acting on the
scale of whole societies. These scholars argue that societies shape individual
behavior rather than the reverse. Various kinds of functionalists in sociology and
anthropology, symbolic anthropologists, and to some extent Marxists adhere to this
“holistic” paradigm.
To some readers, it may seem that we must side with the reductionists because
we attempt to discover the causes of the large-scale and long-term patterns of
society in terms of events in the lives of individuals. This is a misperception. In our
models the two levels are reciprocally linked; large-scale processes affect smallscale phenomena, and vice versa. We take the group (or population) of individuals
as our fundamental unit. A group can be characterized by the number of individuals
who exhibit each different cultural variant. We refer to this as the “distribution of
cultural variants” (or phenotypes) within the group. To understand why a group is
characterized by a particular distribution of cultural variants, we must understand
the forces of cultural evolution that act on members of the group. Some of these
forces have their origin in the psychology of individuals. Learning and rational
calculation can affect the frequency of phenotypes through the force of guided
variation, and various genetically or culturally acquired psychological predis-

24

Some Methodological Preliminaries

positions may lead to biased cultural transmission. Other forces are the result of
larger-scale social processes. Cultural transmission creates heritable variation in
behavior between individuals and groups of individuals. Social processes which
increase the frequencies of some kinds of individuals or groups lead to the force of
natural selection. To predict the equilibrium distribution of cultural variants in a
particular population we need to deduce the net effects of the various forces.
The way that dual inheritance models are used to link processes at different
levels is illustrated by the simple example of a recursion model that was just
outlined. Because there are only two variants, the distribution of cultural variants
can be specified by the frequency of one of the variants, say homebodies. Some of
the forces affecting the frequency of homebodies seem most plausibly the result of
psychological factors. For example, life-style choice during adolescence might be
determined mainly by the attractiveness of fast living. Other of the forces are more
plausibly the effect of social factors. The number of children that a couple can have
might depend on their income. In a peaceful agrarian society homebodies might
have higher incomes, while in a society that relied on warfare and conquest,
hellraisers might do better. In this way the nature of the social structure can affect
which cultural traditions predominate.
Modeling Complex Phenomena

Human evolution is both extremely complex and extremely diverse. It is complex
because to understand it we must understand the details of how individuals acquire
and modify attitudes and beliefs, how different attitudes and beliefs interact with

genes and environment to produce behavior, and how behavior and environment
interact to produce consequences for individual lives, in addition to the complexities of organic evolution. It is diverse because we expect human populations to be
quite different from one another. Each exemplar of the human evolutionary process
not only is exposed to a different environment but also may have a unique cultural
inheritance system.
The problem of how to construct useful theories of complex social and biological
processes such as human evolution has preoccupied ecologists, economists, sociologists, and psychologists for several decades. The answer may seem obvious: to be
useful, models must be realistic; they should incorporate all of the factors that
scientists studying the phenomena know to be important. Models built following
this reasoning will usually be quite complicated. This view is certainly plausible,
and many scientists, particularly in economics (e.g. Hudson and Jorgenson, 1974)
and ecology (e.g. Watt, 1964), have constructed such models.
We believe that building such detailed models is the wrong approach if one’s
goal is to arrive at a general understanding of a diverse class of evolutionary
processes. We have adopted another modeling strategy that is also widely used in
evolutionary biology and economics. We try to build a variety of simple models
which can be completely understood but which still capture the generic properties
of the processes of interest. Following Liebenstein (1976: Chap. 2) we will call the
simple models “sample theories.” Useful sample theories result from attempts to
satisfy two competing desiderata: They should be simple enough to be clearly and
completely grasped and at the same time approximate how the world actually does

Modeling Complex Phenomena

25

work. Within these constraints sample theories may be more or less specific. All
of the sample theories we will present are designed to capture the qualitative
properties of the whole class of processes which they are used to represent. The
whole collection of sample theories and combinations of them creates a general
theory of how the whole complex of processes work.
The population genetical theory of evolution provides a good example of such
a general theory. Each of the basic processes (e.g. selection, mutation, drift) is
represented by a large variety of simple models, some specific to a particular
population, others quite general. These models are combined in different ways to
represent interesting phenomena (e.g. sexual selection, speciation). This whole
family of models, together with a knowledge of which models are appropriate for
what kinds of situations, constitutes the theory.

In defense of simple models
All of the models presented in this book will be quite simple compared to the
phenomena they are intended to represent. To keep the models simple we must
deliberately omit many details that specialists in the relevant disciplines believe are
important. We eschew more detailed models because (1) they are not useful for
representing generic processes, (2) they are hard to understand, (3) they are difficult
to analyze, and (4) they are often no more useful for prediction than simple models.
Let us now consider each of these points in turn.
1. We do not seem to be able to construct models of social and biological
phenomena that are general, realistic, and precisely predictive (Levins, 1966,
1968). That is, evolutionary biologists and social scientists have not been able to
satisfy the epistemological norm derived from the physical sciences which holds
that theory be in the form of universal laws that can be tested by the detailed
predictions they make about the phenomena considered by the law. This failure is
probably a consequence of the complexity and diversity of living things. Basic
theoretical constructs like natural selection are not universal laws like gravitation;
rather they are taxonomic entities, general classes of similar processes which
nonetheless have a good deal of diversity within the class. A theoretical construct
designed to represent the general properties of the class of processes labeled
“natural selection” must sacrifice many of the details of particular examples of
selection. On the other hand, a model tailored to the details of a particular case is
unlikely to have much relevance beyond that case. Further, the most precise
predictions may be obtained by statistical models which sacrifice realism and hence
are useless as explanatory devices.
2. Complex, detailed models are usually extremely difficult to understand. As
more realism is added, the myriad interactions within the model become almost as
opaque as the real world we wish to understand. When a set of not-so-complex parts
is linked together to form an interacting complex, it is often impossible to understand why the results behave as they do. To substitute an ill-understood model of
the world for the ill-understood world is not progress. In the end, the only way to
understand how such a model works is to abstract pieces from it or study simplified
cases where its behavior is more transparent. Even when complex models are

26

Some Methodological Preliminaries

useful, they are so because we understand how they work in terms of simple models
abstracted from them.
:
3. The analysis of complex models is also expensive and time consuming. The
complexity of a recursion model is roughly measured by the number of independent
variables that must be kept track of from generation to generation. It usually is not
possible to analyze nonlinear recursions involving more than a handful of variables
without resorting to numerical techniques. Until the advent of digital computers,
obtaining numerical solutions was impractical. Since then, however, there have
been many attempts made to simulate realistic computer models of complex social
and biological processes. These projects have generally been quite costly. As the
number of variables in a model increases, the number of interactions between
variables increases even faster. This means that, even with the fastest computers,

it is not practical to explore the sensitivity of a model to changes in assumptions
about very many of its constituent interactions.
4. Detailed models of complex social or biological systems often are not much
more useful for prediction than are simple models. Detailed models usually require
very large amounts of data to determine the various parameter values in the model.
Such data are rarely available. Moreover, small inaccuracies or errors in the formulation of the model can produce quite erroneous predictions. The temptation is to
“tune” the model, making small changes, perhaps well within the error of available
data, so that the model

produces reasonable

answers.

When

this is done, any

predictive power that the model might have is due more to statistical fitting than to
the fact that it accurately represents actual causal processes. It is easy to make large
sacrifices of understanding (realism and generality) for small gains in predictive
power.

That the general theory applied to the problems of biological and cultural
evolution is built up of the analysis of simple sample theories does not mean that
the general theory itself is simple. The objective is not to produce one universal
theoretical model with one sample theory chosen for each component, although
such a model may have great heuristic utility as a kind of elementary textbook
reference point. Rather, general theory, as it matures, becomes a large family of
sample theories and analyses of combinations of them. If the lessons of population
biology are correct, this enterprise sometimes does lead to robust results, conclusions that are approximately correct for a wide variety of possible sample models.
For kinds of phenomena that are truly diverse, the result is a classification of cases
into types where different sample models must be used. For example, some organisms are haploid, some diploid and some are sexual, some asexual. Some
evolutionary phenomena are rather robust with regard to such things, and a theorist
might appropriately choose the simplest model. It may even be appropriate to use,
Say, a haploid sample model to analyze some theoretical questions where one
knows the organisms of interest are diploid and that this assumption will lead to
unrealism and modest predictive power. Such choices are often made because other
parts of the model are complex and some particular patently unrealistic assumption
seems unlikely to lead to qualitative changes in the results. However, if the behavior of diploid organisms is known to be quite different from haploid ones
for the
phenomenon under consideration, the assumption of haploidy may be
not a convenient or desirable simplification but a serious error.

Modeling Complex Phenomena

27

The utility of general theory

Does general theory based on a collection of simple sample models have any
serious scientific purpose? Some might argue that their qualitative kind of understanding is, at best, useful for giving nonspecialists a simplified overview of
complicated topics and that real scientific progress still occurs entirely in the
construction of theories that actually predict. A sterner critic might characterize the
attempt to assemble simple models into a general theory as loose speculation that
actually inhibits the real work of discovering precisely predictable relationships.
These kinds of objections implicitly assume that it is possible to do science without
any kind of general model. All scientists have mental models of the world. The part
of the model that deals with their disciplinary specialty is more detailed than the
parts that represent related areas of science. Many aspects of a scientist’s mental
model are likely to be vague and never expressed. The real choice is between an
intuitive, perhaps covert, general theory and an explicit, often mathematical one.
The most important function of general theory is to link the many disciplines
contributing to the understanding of a complex problem like the evolution of human
behavior. The general theory suggests what properties of sample theories are essential in order to make the theory complete. It makes it possible to deduce the consequences of alternative sample theories in one discipline for the phenomena
studied by another. For example, in the next chapter we will be concerned with the
details of how cultural transmission occurs, a subject studied by psychologists.
Social learning theorists have made many, but not all, of the kinds of measurements

that are necessary for specifying good sample theories of cultural transmission.
Some of the crucial unknowns include the mechanisms by which variation and
covariation are maintained in cultural traits. These properties have important implications for the process of cultural evolution because forces of the bias and natural
selection depend on the maintenance of variation to be effective. The relative
strength of the various evolutionary forces acting on culture in turn determines rates
of evolution and the kinds of traits we expect to be common at equilibrium. These
deficiencies of social learning theory are not at all apparent in the absence of a
genera! theory linking the psychology of enculturation with the macroscopic phenomena of social institutions and long-run outcomes. When we force ourselves to
construct models that make these links, even if they are simple caricatures, we often
discover that processes with small, relatively hard-to-measure effects can produce
major results. The frequency dependent bias force we will examine in Chapter 7
could have a large effect on the distribution of variation in populations, even if it
is so small as to be difficult to measure in the psychological laboratory. Sensible
social learning theorists would not undertake such arduous and costly experiments
unless a general theoretical argument gave them reasonable confidence that the
results would bear on an important problem.
By treating specific models as sample theories, a general theory may also help
us decide when it may be worthwhile to sacrifice generality for prediction. At least
in a mature general theory, a good many sample models will have been formulated
and their behavior explored. The theory will contain information about which kinds
of sample theories have proven to be useful approximations under various conditions. Robust results will be known. In other words, the general theory is a
population of sample theories about which we know something. Given a particular

28

Some Methodological Preliminaries

situation where accurate prediction is desired, a general theory provides a compendium of potential sample theories that might be applied, together with some guidance for what kinds of models can be constructed and what sort of prediction can
or cannot be sought.
As a matter of practical scientific strategy in biology and the social sciences, the
use of general theory built up from simple models is not a substitute for a more
sophisticated method, but the most sophisticated possible given the complexity and
diversity inherent in the subject matter. Human behavior is certainly the product of
the interaction of genes, culture, and environment expressed in phenomena as
diverse as individual behavior and the social and political organizations of “world
systems.” No one discipline addresses more than a small fraction of this totality.
Because we cannot build predictive general theories in the style of physics, the
efforts of these disciplines must either be guided by simplified general theories or
be left to drift in isolation. Under the latter condition, advancing understanding is
extremely difficult. Long-run improvements in the ability of science to predict are
dependent on a general theoretical understanding. Human behavior may be so
complex that no single set of manageable sample theories will give even qualitatively correct predictions for all traits in all societies, but an adequate general
theory might allow us to understand how to construct appropriately predictive
sample theories under various conditions.
Testing the theory
Because simplified sample theories omit many important details, they usually only
result in a qualitative understanding of the phenomena of interest. They cannot give
us detailed, quantitative predictions about the outcome of any particular experiment. For example, neo-Darwinian theory is an elegant scientific account of why
most plants and animals are closely adapted to the environments they live in, and
microeconomic theory is a similarly elegant account of the role of price in equilibrating supply and demand. Neither is useful by itself for making precise quantitative predictions about the dynamics of particular populations or particular markets. Indeed, if we pressed them into service as predictive instruments, we would

be pleasantly surprised if they worked at all.
It is difficult to subject a general theory assembled out of simple models to a
direct empirical test because the failure to predict the outcome of a particular
experiment or observation cannot falsify the theory. Sample theories usually omit
many important processes from consideration. The theory may be correct and still
fail in many particular instances as a result of the action of unincluded processes.
No one would be surprised if any simple model of interspecies competition failed
to predict the history of interaction in a particular community because such models
typically neglect such factors as genetic variation within populations and environmental heterogeneity which could have important effects on population dynamics.
The relationship between a general theory of complex systems and empirical test
or prediction is a subtle one. To insist upon empirical science in the style of physics
is to insist upon the impossible. However, to give up on empirical
tests and
prediction would be to abandon science and retreat to speculative philosop
hy. A
mature general theory like population genetics tells us which sample
theories are

Use of Data

29

likely to be relevant to any particular phenomenon or observation. These sample
theories in turn make qualitative predictions, or perhaps even quantitative predictions in some special cases. If some sample theory is consistently at variance with
the data then it must be modified. The accumulation of these kinds of modifications
can eventually alter general theory, either by compelling the abandonment of some
sample models or by systematizing knowledge about the variation of processes. In
extreme cases, major discoveries in some of the components of a general theory can
compel the reorganization of the entire edifice, as exemplified by the impact of
Mendelian genetics on Darwinian theory in biology.
In the meantime, general theory is useful so long as its predictions are qualitatively correct, roughly conforming to the majority of cases. Nor is it necessarily
an embarrassment if more than one alternative formulation of a general theory, built

from different sample models, is more or less equally correct. In this case, the
comparison of theories that are empirically equivalent makes clearer what is at stake
in scientific controversies and may suggest empirical and theoretical steps toward
a resolution.

Use of Data

Throughout this book we will use data from the social sciences and human biology
to motivate the models of particular processes, and then to illustrate possible
instances of the hypotheses that result. The social sciences and human biology
constitute a huge body of knowledge. We do not claim to have thoroughly surveyed
each of the many relevant fields, and we make no claim to have constructed a
completely satisfactory general theory even in the limited sense suggested above.
These are long-term tasks, and much of the work involved demands highly specialized knowledge. Psychologists will have to play a major role in the formulation and
testing of theories of cultural transmission, and only anthropologists and sociologists have the kind of expertise necessary to judge which among several alternative
formulations of a general theory gives the best overall qualitative fit to the macroscopic evidence.
Our more modest objectives are:
1. To be sure that the simple models we chose to represent particular processes
are reasonable. Thus we have tried to motivate each model with data from the
relevant areas in the social sciences or human biology. Even if our review is not
entirely competent and our choices of sample models less than the best possible,
we hope to have given our readers a clear point of argument if they disagree.
2. To represent the most controversial or least known part of a process with a
variable term in the models. In this way, different readings of ambiguous data can
be evaluated in a common theoretical framework by examining the quantitative
properties of the model. For example, the models of learning and cultural transmission in Chapter 4 allow a given trait to be determined by any mixture of
nonsocial learning and cultural transmission in order to represent the controversy
over the degree to which humans behave as rational actors.
3. To show how the general theory can be used to gain a qualitative understanding of some of the observed macroscopic features of human behavior. For

30

Some Methodological Preliminaries

example, the scale of social organization is larger and the degree of cooperation
among members of a given society is greater in humans than in other primates. In
Chapter 7 we show how an empirically plausible form of biased cultural transmission can result in patterns of cooperation that seem to conform to those anthropologists and sociologists observe.
In short, our use of empirical information in theory construction is mainly
illustrative. We have tried to use enough data in model construction and provide
enough “tests” of models to show how our theory works and to demonstrate its
power and utility. In so doing, we hope to have constructed a general theory
sufficiently realistic to clarify the basic issues surrounding processes by which the
interactions of genes and culture produce human behavior. We even entertain hopes
that some of our specific hypotheses will turn out to be approximately correct. We
beg our readers’ indulgence of this last pretension and ask that it not be allowed to
obscure the more fundamental arguments.
In Defense of Mathematical Models
Mathematical models are arduous to construct, analyze, and read, even for the well

trained. They appear to contradict our argument for the virtues of simplicity, and,
carelessly used, they can be quite misleading. However, mathematical analysis can
also be extremely useful. By using this approach we can usually manage the logic
involved in a model that is a bit more complex and realistic than would otherwise
be possible. The human mind has very limited powers of deduction, especially
when several processes interact in a quantitative or probabilistic fashion (see Chap.
5, pp. 168-170). Mathematical models often demand considerable simplification
and abstraction to satisfy the constraints of analytical tractability, and for this
reason they often seem objectionably artificial. However, attempting to deduce the
answer to a complex problem by direct inspection and unaided intuition requires
even simpler models and entails great risk of erroneous reasoning. In our own case
at least, the formal exercise of reducing intuitive notions to mathematical propositions and deriving results has often led to unexpected conclusions.
However, mathematical analysis by itself is not sufficient; the well-known
contemporary aphorism “garbage in, garbage out” applies to any logical analysis,
not just computer calculations. Our nonmathematical readers, who may have to take
the formal analysis pretty much on faith, should not despair. We have tried to
explain in words as clearly as possible what assumptions are built into the models,
what the results mean, and what their main limitations are. Quite aside from any
desire to make the book accessible to such readers, our experience is that an
inability to produce a sensible prose explanation of how a model works often
indicates there is something wrong with the model.

In Defense of Analogies
The basic point of departure for the dual inheritance model is the analogy between
genes and culture. Analogies between the behavior of humans and that of other
animals have often been judged objectionable. Such analogies have often been

Conclusion

31

misused, and much of their bad reputation is deserved. On the other hand, Masters
(1973) argues that analogies between human and animal behavior are both ines-

capable and, when properly constructed, useful. Clarifying how we will use analogical reasoning may answer some potential objections that derive from experience
with inappropriate analogies.
The main reason we are interested in using the inheritance system analogy is
practical. To the extent that the transmission of culture and the transmission of
genes are similar processes, we can borrow the well-developed conceptual categories and formal machinery of Darwinian biology to analyze problems. The work of
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (e.g. 1981) has been particularly thorough in exploiting this use of the analogy.
However, we are as interested in the disanalogies between the cultural and
genetic inheritance as in their similarities. If cultural inheritance were exactly
analogous to genes, its existence would not present any interesting problems. We
might wonder briefly why a system which duplicated the structure and function of
DNA ever arose in the first place and go on to treat humans as if they had extra
chromosomes of a rather odd kind. Human evolution is interesting, and difficult to

understand, because there are important disanalogies between genes and culture. In
fact, we will argue that the structural differences between the two systems may well
have arisen because the two systems are functionally analogous, that is, both
systems serve to enhance ordinary Darwinian fitness. For example, in Chapter 4 we
show how the disanalogous inheritance of acquired variation can increase genetic
fitness in some kinds of environments. On the other hand, the natural selection on

cultural variation is closely analogous to natural selection on genes, but we will
argue that it can lead to the evolution of behaviors that are not functionally close
analogs of ordinary adaptations.
Conclusion

Constructing a satisfying explanatory theory of human behavior is clearly an ambitious undertaking. The topic is complex, and our empirical knowledge is woefully
incomplete. However, we are convinced that the Darwinian approach we have
sketched in this chapter is a sound one because it can clarify the logical relationships
between evolution and human behavior and between various levels of explanation
in the social sciences. However crude the initial attempts to construct theory and
use it turn out to be, we are convinced that they will serve as a firm foundation for
progressive improvement.

3
The Cultural Inheritance System
Mohammedans are Mohammedans because they are born and reared among
that sect, not because they have thought it out and can furnish sound reasons
for being Mohammedans; we know why Catholics are Catholics; why Presbyterians are Presbyterians; why Baptists are Baptists; why Mormons are Mormons; why thieves are thieves; why monarchists are monarchists; why Republicans are Republicans and Democrats, Democrats. We know that it is a matter

of association and sympathy, not reasoning and examination; that hardly a man
in the world has an opinion on morals, politics, or religion that he got otherwise
than through his associations and sympathies.
Mark Twain, “Cornpone Opinions,” in Mark Twain on

the Damned Human Race (1923 [1962]: 24)

The essay “Cornpone Opinions” was found among Mark Twain’s papers after his
death. In it, Twain tells how as a boy of fifteen he used to listen enraptured to the
sermons of an “impudent and satirical and delightful young blackman” named Jerry
who preached sermons from the top of his master’s woodpile. One of his texts was:
“You tell me whar a man gits his corn pone, en I'll tell you what his ’pinions is.”
Twain remembers Jerry and his sermons fondly, but he devotes the essay to
disputing Jerry’s thesis. Instead of adopting cornpone opinions, Twain argues,
people adopt the opinions of those around them without giving much thought to
what those opinions might be. In our terminology, people inherit rather than choose
their views on religion, politics, and morals. To explain why thieves are thieves or
Republicans, Republicans, we must understand how and from whom they culturally inherited their beliefs.
As usual, Mark Twain is somewhat exaggerated in his opinions. People do not
believe what they believe solely because they inherit the beliefs of others. Some of
the evolutionary forces that affect the frequency of various beliefs in the population
result from “cornpone” effects such as rational choice. However, if Twain was even
partly correct that people inherit their beliefs and values, the population-level
properties of culture will be important.
In this chapter we explore the notion that cultural transmission in humans has the
properties of a system of inheritance. We begin by elaborating the definition of
cultural inheritance given in Chapter 1. Then we will review empirical evidence
from the social sciences that suggests that the cultural continuity of groups is due
to inheritance of beliefs and values, and is not merely a result of the effects of
individual learning and correlated environments. Finally, we will try to show in a
simple way how these structural features can be translated into mathematical
models that describe the changes in the frequencies of different behaviors from one
generation to the next. We hope to explicate the basic logic of the dual inheritance
32

Defining Cultural Inheritance

33

approach, convince the reader that it is a reasonable depiction of social learning in
humans, and at the same time introduce several kinds of mathematical machinery
that are used throughout the rest of the book.
Defining Cultural Inheritance
What is culture? In anthropology, the term “culture” is used in many different and
only partially overlapping senses. In 1952 Kroeber and Kluckhohn identified 164
definitions of culture proposed by historians and social scientists, and that number
has undoubtedly grown. Their taxonomy of definitions required six major categories and ten subcategories, which gives some idea of the complexity of the culture
concept. Social scientists seem to agree that culture is a socially transmitted heritage peculiar to a particular human society, but beyond this there is little consensus.
In a recent review, Keesing (1974) argues that contemporary conceptions of culture
fall into four distinct categories which differ in several fundamental ways. Consider
just one dimension of the debate, the extent to which culture is seen as concrete

behavior and artifact as opposed to a purely ideational concept. Members of one
group, whom Keesing labels “cultural adaptationists,” define culture in terms of
observable, socially transmitted patterns of behavior. For example, Marvin Harris
(1971: 136) offers,
Cultures are patterns of behavior, thought and feeling that are acquired or
influenced through learning and that are characteristic of groups of people
rather than of individuals.

The other three categories of theories define culture exclusively in terms of ideas.
For example, Ward Goodenough (1957: 167) suggests the following definition:
[A] society’s culture consists of whatever it is one has to know or believe in

order to operate in a manner acceptable to its members. . . . We should note
that culture is not a material phenomenon; it does not consist of things, people,
behavior, or emotions. . . . It is the forms of things that people have in their
mind, their models for perceiving, relating and otherwise interpreting them.

Other differences that Keesing reviews seem to be of nearly equal importance.
Like virtually all of the definitions of culture used in the social sciences, our
definition emphasizes the notion that culture is a socially transmitted heritage:
Culture is information capable of affecting individuals’ phenotypes which they
acquire from other conspecifics by teaching or imitation.

The information that a particular individual inherits culturally will be referred to as
that individual’s cultural repertoire; specific elements of the cultural repertoire are
called his or her cultural variant. We will sometimes use the word culture by itself
in two other ways: (1) to describe the information acquired by all the individuals
in a particular group or society at a particular time, as for example, “Yanomamo
culture,” and (2) in a loose way to refer to the entire system of cultural inheritance,
as for example, “genes vs. culture.”

Our definition reflects several important conceptual distinctions that require
elaboration. It is within the range of variation encompassed by other definitions in

the social sciences, and, like them, it includes some distinctions but not others. It

34

The Cultural Inheritance System

focuses on the process of cultural inheritance (or transmission) because that is the

foundation of our analytical work and because we believe that it is the nature of
cultural transmission that makes the evolutionary process of humans (and perhaps
other cultural organisms) distinctive. Kroeber and Kluckhohn would have classified
ours as a psychological definition with emphasis on learning. In contrast to other
definitions they analyzed, it stresses the individual rather than society, the process
of social learning rather than historical tradition, and it does not mention the
functional properties of culture. As the analysis proceeds, we will find that these
properties are implications of the process-based definition.
Why cultural inheritance is restricted to social learning
In the nature-nurture controversy, the concepts of culture, learning, and environment are usually regarded as nearly synonymous. We believe that each of these
ideas plays a different role in explaining human behavior. The essential feature of
culture is social learning, the nongenetic transfer of patterns of skill, thought, and
feeling from individual to individual in a population or society. The social aspect
of social learning can create novel evolutionary processes in cultural organisms
through the existence of socially transmitted traditions that are not directly attributable to genetic factors and immediate environmental contingencies. To understand the evolutionary process of an organism with cultural transmission one must
understand the forces that affect the frequency of different culturally transmitted
variants in a population.
Social learning is only one of several nongenetic mechanisms by which individuals in a population can acquire a given pattern of behavior. Any mode of phenotypic flexibility will cause genetically similar individuals to resemble one another
in similar environments. For example, a given European population’s complexion
will tend toward a given color. If a subset of the population moves to a sunnier
climate, the typical color will become darker. In the human species both trial-anderror learning and rational calculation are potent mechanisms for producing similar
patterns of behavior in similar environments because each individual independently
tends to adopt the behaviors appropriate to that environment. Learning and other
modes of phenotypic flexibility do have features in common with culture (Alexander, 1979a: 76-77), but it is the social transmission of culture that gives it an

evolutionary dynamic different from ordinary learning and its analogs.

Not all social learning is cultural transmission

We have included the word “information” in our definition of cultural transmission
to exclude certain simple modes of social influence on behavior, which cannot
respond to evolutionary forces like natural selection in the same way as information
does that is culturally transmitted. To see why this is true, consider the kinds of
social learning that have been observed in animals other than man.

Bennet Galef (1976) provides an excellent review of the social transmission
of

acquired behavior in which he defines social learning as any “long-term homogeneity of behavior resulting from the transmission of patterns of behavior from
individual to individual within a population as a consequence of social interaction.”

Defining Cultural Inheritance

35

Such transmission forms a graded series:

1. Traits for which the presence of a conspecific, usually the parents, is necessary for normal development, but variant behaviors are not transmitted. For example, young female rhesus macaques need social companions in order to develop
normal maternal behavior later in life (e.g. Harlow and Harlow,

1969).

2. The acquisition of behaviors specific to particular localities through habitat
imprinting. Many animals have home ranges that remain relatively fixed for many
generations because the young form an attachment to the area in which they are
born. The homing behavior of Pacific salmon and many migratory birds are wellknown examples. In more complex cases, modification of the habitat constrains the
behavior of new generations. For example, prairie dog territorial organization
remains stable for many generations because of the effects of the complex burrow
system (King, 1951, 1959).

3. Guided learning. Juvenile animals commonly follow adults. Similarly,
dominant individuals tend to influence group movements. Both of these kinds of
behavior will cause naive and subordinate individuals to be exposed to the same
stimuli and reinforcements experienced by older or more dominant individuals.
Guiding or following plus trial-and-error learning will result in the behavior of
naive individuals resembling that of older or dominant individuals.
4. Social learning in the narrow sense. Animals may acquire behavior directly
from conspecifics by imitating their behavior or because conspecifics (often parents) teach naive offspring by reinforcing appropriate behavior. Food preferences
are one of the commonest traits nonhuman species acquire in this way. The spread
of rather complex food handling traditions in Japanese macaques is a good example
(Kawai,

1965). The observers introduced novel food items (sweet potatoes and

wheat) which individual monkeys learned to process and eat. The learned techniques spread gradually throughout the troop, mostly from mothers to their offspring but also from juvenile to juvenile.

The incorporation of “imitation” and “teaching” with information in our
definition of cultural inheritance is meant to restrict our definition of culture to
social learning in the fourth, narrow sense. It is our intuition that only this kind of
social learning is likely to have dynamic properties analogous to genetic inheritance. We use the term “information” to mean something which has the property
that energetically minor causes have energetically major effects (Engelberg and
Boyarsky, 1979). Because of this, information is cheap to store and replicate once
acquired, and is easily transmitted to new individuals. For example, DNA, which
represents a small fraction of the biomass of an organism, controls the energetically
major features of metabolism and phenotype. Similarly, culture is cheaply acquired
information, encoded in memory, that is capable of producing major phenotypic
effects. Guided learning is not cultural transmission because the naive individual
must acquire its own information by a process of reinforcement that is almost as
costly as ordinary individual learning. It is the transmitted-information character of
genes and the products of social learning that give organic and cultural evolution
features not shared by cosmological or geological evolution, where information is
not involved, or by the processes of individual learning, where the acquired information is costly and not transmitted.

36

The Cultural Inheritance System

To illustrate the importance of this distinction consider the question, Are prairie
dog burrows culture? The inheritance of an artifact, the burrow, will certainly affect

the behavior of a young prairie dog. Genetically identical prairie dogs which inherit
burrows of different quality or in different locations may act very differently.
However, burrows are a form of culture by our definition only if the shape and
dimensions of a burrow are learned by prairie dogs who live there, are encoded in
the memories of its prairie dog residents, and tend to be replicated by individuals
who emigrate to new locations. Only then can burrows with advantageous geometry increase in frequency by natural selection (or some similar force). If, on the
other hand, the form of the burrow is not so encoded, it will not have the potential

to increase in frequency. Thus it cannot have evolutionary properties similar to
genetically transmitted characters.
The cultural repertoire is analogous to genotype

“Information” was also included in our definition of cultural transmission because
it is important to distinguish behavior and the products of behavior from patterns
of thought and feeling. Harris, like many anthropologists, lumps behavior together
with thought and feeling in his definition of culture. Many other definitions even
include artifacts—tools, structures, and artwork—in the culture concept. We agree
with Clifford Geertz (1973: 44, 143-146) that it is important to exclude behavior

and the products of behavior from the definition of culture because behavior is
contingent upon both patterns of thought and feeling and environmental circumstances. Two individuals with identical sets of culturally acquired dispositions may
behave quite differently in different environments. Thus by our definition, the
relationship between culture and behavior is similar to the relationship between
genotype and phenotype in noncultural organisms.
Defining culture in terms of people’s mental states (the “emic” concept of
anthropology or the “cognitive” of social psychology) does not imply that culture
is completely unobservable or that culture and behavior are not linked. As we shall
see, the evidence from social learning theory (e.g. Rosenthal and Zimmerman,
1978) indicates that it is possible to observe the process of social learning and to
obtain experimental evidence about the covert cognitive processes that govern its
acquisition, storage, and influence on behavior. Only by distinguishing culture
from behavior can we see clearly how social learning interacts with environmental
contingencies to produce behavior.
Symbols

We will not make the common anthropological distinction that restricts culture to
behaviors encoded by a system of shared symbolic constructs such as language,
myth, or ritual (e.g. Schneider, 1976). The codification of culture in public symbol

systems may have interesting effects on the human evolutionary process (see Chap.

8), but to our minds these effects are less fundamental than the effect of social

learning per se. It is possible that language and other symbolic capacities were late

developments

in human

evolution

(Lieberman,

1975; Isaac,

1976; Marshack,

1976) and that the apparently effective food-foraging way of life that characterized

Defining Cultural Inheritance

37

hominids until the late Pleistocene was transmitted by direct phenotypic copying
unmediated by arbitrarily meaningful codes. It is even plausible that much of
human behavior is still so acquired (e.g. Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978).
Social norms

Goodenough’s definition implies that culture is only that part of an individual’s
repertoire of socially learned traits that is acceptable to other members of the
society. Freilich’s (1980) suggestion that culture is “proper” behavior more explicitly calls attention to this dimension of variation in the cultural repertoire. Once
again, our definition is more general. All variants acquired by social learning,
including perhaps antisocial behavior, will be subject to evolutionary processes.

Culture as a property of individuals
Most anthropologists probably think of culture as a property of human groups, not
of individuals, and for some the very essence of the culture concept is that groups
of humans share a common set of culturally transmitted “meanings” (e.g. Schneider,

1968; Geertz,

1972). Many of the definitions reviewed by Kroeber and

Kluckhohn stress the social unit. It may seem to our anthropological readers that
by defining cultural transmission in terms of social learning by individuals we have
improperly reduced a group phenomenon to an individual one. Such is not the case.
As Ward Goodenough (1981: 54) has noted,
People learn as individuals. Therefore, if culture is learned, its ultimate locus

must be in individuals rather than in groups... . If we accept this, then
cultural theory must explain in what sense we can speak of culture as being
shared or as the property of groups . . . and what the processes are by which
such sharing arises.

One of our goals is to understand how the psychological processes that underlie
both ordinary and social learning interact with other social processes to produce the
observed distributions of cultural variants in groups. It should be kept in mind,
however, that the theory presented in this book takes the cultural population (i.e.
the group or society) as its fundamental unit. To understand the dynamics of the
cultural evolution we must understand how interacting individuals affect the distribution of culturally transmitted variants in the population.

The units of cultural inheritance
Our definition of culture is not at all specific about the nature of the information that
affects phenotypes. In particular, we do not assume that culture is encoded as
discrete “particles.” In other recent work the existence of such particles is assumed,
for example,

Dawkins’s

(1976)

“meme”

and Lumsden

and Wilson’s

(1981)

“culturgen.” (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 7, give a brief review of similar terms.)
Relatively little can be said on this topic since our knowledge of the neurophysiology of social learning is primitive compared to our knowledge of the
molecular biology of the gene. Moreover, as we will argue later in this chapter, it

38

The Cultural Inheritance System

is possible to construct a cogent, plausible theory of cultural evolution without
assuming particulate inheritance.
We have avoided a holistic element in our definition for similar reasons, although Tylor’s (1871) classical definition and many others descended from it
include such (Kroeber and Kluckhohn, 1952: 43-46). The degree to which cultural
repertoires are integrated, and the mechanisms by which such integration is accomplished, are poorly understood and controversial empirical problems. They cannot
be settled by definitional fiat. For example, Bandura and Walters (1963) argue from
the evidence of social learning experiments that human behavior is very weakly
integrated. We will analyze some elementary models of the linkage between elements of cultural repertoires in subsequent chapters.

Beliefs, values, and desires

We have also deliberately avoided the usual identification of culture with people’s
felt values, desires, and beliefs. Social scientists generally, and many cultural
anthropologists in particular (e.g. Sahlins, 1976a), have freely treated the operational units of culture as the shared meanings available by introspection in one’s
own culture or by ethnographic study of others’ felt meanings via empathetic
observations and the reports of informants. The problem is that there is no guarantee that the actual culturally inherited determinants of behavior bear any close
resemblance to our intuitive notions of what causes our.own or others’ behavior.
Rosenberg (1980a) presents a very cogent series of deductive arguments on the
difficulty of using the beliefs and desires of conventional experience as the basis for
theory in the social sciences. These arguments are strengthened by a variety of
empirical studies which suggest that self-reports and empathetic assessments of the
determinants of behavior are not trustworthy (e.g. Milgram, 1965; Nuttin, 1975;
Nisbett and Wilson, 1977; Nisbett and Ross, 1980).
In order to avoid awkward neologisms, we will continue to use words like

“beliefs” and “values” to refer to the culturally transmitted behavioral dispositions,
keeping in mind that the units of cultural inheritance must be discovered, or at least
verified, by experiment, not introspection. Furthermore, we will use the ample data
social scientists have collected about opinions, beliefs, and values to motivate and

test the models on the assumption that they may bear a reasonable resemblance to
actual dispositions. This assumption may very well have to be modified in the face
of better information about the actual nature of cultural determinants of behavior.
Review of Data from the Social Sciences

How much culture is there?

The conceptual difficulties of distinguishing the effects of genetic, cultural, and
environmental variation on human behavior pale beside the operational problems
of actually measuring them. With rare exceptions, neither genetic variation, nor
cultural variation, nor the complex processes by which developing phenotypes
respond to different environments can be directly observed. The genetic system is
reasonably well understood; the DNA code can be read and some simple cases of

the interaction between genes and environment can be understood in their entirety.

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

39

Nonetheless, biologists are far from being able to give a complete account of how
the genes interact with each other and with the environment to produce phenotypes.
We are only beginning to understand the mental processes underlying the storage
and expression of culture (Wickelgren, 1981). In practice scientists are reduced to
inferring the effects of unobservable causal variables—genes, cultures, and environmental interactions—by studying their effects on phenotypes. This is not an
insuperable task, witness the progress in genetics before Watson and Crick, but it
adds difficulties.
The essential empirical problem is that genetic transmission, cultural transmission, and correlated environments all have similar effects on phenotypes. For
example, suppose we were to measure the similarity between the economic behavior of fathers and sons. Further suppose that the data include both cases in which
sons inherit ownership of a business from their fathers and cases in which they do
not. It is likely that the data would show that the economic behavior of fathers and
sons is similar, and that the extent of the similarity depends on whether ownership
is transmitted. (See Glass and Hall, 1954, and Blau, 1965, on the statistical
tendency for sons to remain in the same economic class as their fathers.) However,

these facts alone would not help us distinguish the relative roles of genetic inheritance, cultural inheritance, and correlated environments in causing the similarities.

The sons of businessmen might resemble their fathers because they inherited genes
for business acumen, because they learned business practices from their fathers, or
because the simple fact of inheriting the physical plant of the business constrained
their choices.
In the analogous example of the inheritance of prairie dogs’ burrows, an
experimental solution to this dilemma suggests itself immediately. Sibling pups of
known genetic relationship could be allocated at random among foster parents, and
the parents randomly allocated to burrows. So long as gene-culture-environment
interactions are not too complex, such an experiment might reveal the contribution
of each cause to burrow-making behavior; some of the variation in the pups’
behavior could be ascribed to common genotypes (observed similarity between
genetic siblings), some to common cultural inheritance (observed similarity between foster siblings), and some*to common environment (observed similarity
between genetically and culturally unrelated individuals in similar burrows). Eventually, the effects of genes, cultural traits, and learning in determining burrow form
might be dissected in the same detail as the factors affecting bristle number in
Drosophila. Obviously such an experiment is impractical in the case of humans.
Moreover, even the experimental determination of the importance of culture in
other animals has proven to be quite difficult. We are aware of no experiments of
this type in any species, and many apparent cases of nonhuman protoculture are
suspect for this reason (Galef, 1980).
In the human case, the nature-nurture debate persists because of our inability to
make precise measurements of the the influence of culture, genes, and learning in
correlated environments. In the best-studied case, the causes of variation in scores
on IQ tests, the contributions of culture, genes, and correlated environment have
been extremely difficult to disentangle (for a recent review, see Henderson, 1982).

Nevertheless, we feel that a great deal of the observed behavioral variation in
humans can be attributed to cultural inheritance. The theoretical exercises in this

40

The Cultural Inheritance System

book do not require the absence of genetic variation for behavior, or that de novo
learning and individual strategizing are without effect. However, the models are
most interesting if we can assume that some important fraction of behavioral
variants are acquired culturally.
We will briefly review four different lines of evidence that we believe combine
to make a strong, although certainly imperfect, case for the importance of stable,
slowly evolving cultural variation in explaining human behavior:
1. Laboratory experiments show that humans learn from others with great
facility. Social learning theorists have shown in some detail how an individual can
acquire a very large cultural repertoire.
2. Studies of socialization in more naturalistic settings have shown that childrearing patterns are correlated with behavioral variations in children.
3. A large body of psychometric and sociometric studies measuring correlations
among offspring, genetic parents, and various classes of potential cultural parents
provides ample evidence of cultural transmission despite an inevitable tendency for
the effects of genetic, cultural, and environmental variation to be confounded.

4. Historians, sociologists, and anthropologists have found a number of striking
examples of cultural inertia, situations in which cultural ancestry is important in
changed situations or where traditional cultural differences persist in similar environments.

Neither a committed genetic determinist nor a devotee of the rational actor model
of human behavior will necessarily be convinced by this evidence that cultural
transmission has played an important role in human evolution. The evidence does
not completely exclude the possibility that either genetic variation or individual
rational calculation plays so large a role as to make cultural traditions relatively
unimportant. On the other hand, the available data are certainly sufficient to make
plausible the hypothesis that cultural variation is important. The models of this and
subsequent chapters will at the very least serve to help deduce the consequences of
this hypothesis so that it can be tested against other kinds of data.

Social learning

Following Galef, we have defined social learning as the transmission of stable
behavioral dispositions by teaching or imitation. By stable dispositions, we mean
ones that are substantially divorced from environmental contingencies. In other
words, as environmental circumstances change, an individual’sdisposition (though
not necessarily his or her behavior) must tend to remain the same for a significant
period of time. What can psychologists tell us about how such dispositions are
acquired? There are several competing accounts of social learning in contemporary
psychology (Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978; Yando, Seitz, and Zigler, 1978).
Of these the simplest, and perhaps most fully elaborated, is the social learning
theory of Albert Bandura and his followers. We will begin by reviewing Bandura’s
theory of social learning and then indicate how the theories associated with
other
schools differ from Bandura’s.

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

41

Bandura’s social learning theory
In behaviorist learning theory, new behavior is acquired by conditioning. In classical conditioning, a reward or punishment schedule modifies the expression of an
existing behavior (or “reflex”), and in operant conditioning a new behavior is
developed by a system of reinforcement. Experienced enculturating individuals, or
“cultural parents,” commonly condition the behavior of children in order to develop
responses that the parents consider appropriate (Williams, 1972). Children seldom
escape being rewarded and punished by adults, although the extent and deliberateness of the conditioning regime varies greatly within and between societies
(LeVine, 1973). Similarly, other people in positions of authority (policemen,
teachers, priests, headmen, and so forth) reward and punish the behavior of people
of all ages.
It is difficult to believe, however, that a large, sophisticated cultural repertoire
can be acquired by socially controlled conditioning alone. The transmission of
culture by socially controlled conditioning is not an economical process. It requires
that the cultural information be inculcated in offspring fairly gradually by the
repeated application of the reinforcement schedule. Children make errors which
must be extinguished by the careful attention of parents. Even quite severe punishments may not result in the desired behavior unless their design and administration are quite sophisticated (Bandura and Walters, 1963).
Thus, the discovery by psychologists that direct imitation of modeled behavior,
or “observational learning,” is a highly effective means of communicating culture
is a crucial advance. In the early 1960s (e.g. Bandura and Walters, 1963), Albert

Bandura and his followers began to develop experimental methods for investigating
the properties of observational learning. They have been able to use the observational learning paradigm and their experimental protocols to begin to demonstrate
how the huge mass of cultural information is actually transmitted.

The observational learning paradigm

The typical observational learning experiment begins by exposing naive individuals
to a model who exhibits a particular behavior or series of behaviors. Then the naive
individuals are tested to see if they can replicate the behavior of the model. A
classic experiment (Bandura and Walters, 1963) on the modeling of aggressive
behavior will serve as an example of the technique and prototypical results. Gradeschool children viewed films of an adult model exhibiting several stereotypic
aggressive behaviors toward an inflated doll. There were three test conditions; in
each condition children were presented with a slightly different version of the film.
In one condition the model was punished, in a second rewarded, and in a third

neither rewarded nor punished. First, the children were tested for acquisition of
aggression toward the doll by being placed in a room with the doll and observed
for imitative responses. In this case, the vicarious reinforcement effect was strong;
observers of the rewarded model exhibited the most, and observers of the punished
model the least, aggression. In a second test the children from all three treatments
were offered rewards for imitating the aggressive behavior. The performance dif-

42

The Cultural Inheritance System

ferentials then disappeared. Members of all experimental groups replicated the
behavior with high frequency.
Observational learning theorists draw several conclusions from experiments like
this one. The most important conclusion is that covert cognitive operations are
central to the great bulk of social learning. This conclusion directly contradicts
orthodox behaviorism, which holds that observational learning occurs by direct
reinforcement of behaviors that resemble those of a model. In the traditional theory,
the modeled behavior was categorized as a discrimination stimulus and social
learning was said to occur when subjects were reinforced for match-to-sample
behavior. Thus, social learning was characterized as a subclass of operant conditioning (Miller and Dollard, 1941; Gewirtz and Stingle, 1968).
Social learning experiments like the one outlined above show that people learn
by observation in situations where they cannot perform the behavior. A whole
pattern of aggressive behavior was acquired by observing the model in the film,
despite the fact that some groups of children saw the model punished and none of
the children had an opportunity to practice the behavior immediately. The children
encoded both the behavior and the reward or punishment received by the model.
When appropriate rewards were offered, the stored information could be retrieved
and used, even by children who experienced the vicarious punishment of the model.
Thus, the process of observational learning is partly decoupled from reinforcement.
In contrast to the operant conditioning model (stimulus—response— reinforcement) of social learning, these experiments demonstrate that the following,
more complex model applies:
:
Modeled Events Attention Processes Retention Processes>

(depend on stimuli

(cognitive organ-

and observer)

ization, covert
rehearsal)

Motor Reproduction—Motivation Processes— Matching
(physical capabil(external, vicarious, Performance
ities and skills)

and self-reinforcing)

Observational learning depends on a variety of factors characteristic of the
model, the observer, and the environment. The key feature of the system is the
observer’s ability to collect and organize the information about behavior in the
absence of immediate reinforcement. The fact that observational learning does not
require such reinforcement enhances the resemblance between cultural and genetic

transmission. As Bandura (1977: 37-38) summarizes the body of social learning
experiments,
In social learning theory, reinforcement is considered a facilitative rather than

a necessary condition because factors other than response consequences can
influence what people attend to. . . . When attention is drawn to modeled
activities by the events themselves, the addition of positive incentives does not
increase observational learning. Observers display the same amount of observational learning regardless of whether they are informed in advance that
correct imitations, will be rewarded or are given no prior incentives to learn the
modeled performances. After the capacity for observational learning has
fully

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

43

developed, one cannot keep people from learning what they have seen. [Our
emphasis.]

In other words, people involuntarily “inherit” the cultural variants modeled for
them in a way that is analogous to genetic inheritance.
It is plausible that these attributes of observational learning are adaptive. If it is
an advantage to have a large cultural repertoire, traits must be rapidly acquired,
efficiently stored, and largely free from immediate environmental control. In
Bandura’s (1977: 12) words,
The more costly and hazardous the possible mistakes, the heavier is the reliance
on observational learning from competent examples. Apart from the question
of survival, it is difficult to imagine a social transmission process in which
language, lifestyles, and institutional practices of a culture are taught to each
new member by selective reinforcement of fortuitous behaviors, without benefit
of models who exemplify the cultural patterns.

Another important feature of observational learning in humans is the ability to
abstract rules from a series of modeled behaviors. In contrast to the behavioral
model of imitation in which exact reproduction of specific behavior patterns was
stressed, social learning experiments show that people are capable of acquiring
general rules by observational learning. The relevant experiments involve language
acquisition, moral concepts, and problem-solving techniques. The typical experimental paradigm is to expose children to a novel behavior, such as a complex,
nonstandard grammatical form, and evaluate their ability to discover the grammatical rule used to generate the stimulus sentences. Such experiments demonstrate
that children are able to abstract the rule from modeled sentences and use the rule
to generate novel sentences (Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978: Chap. 2). Often, in
an extension of the previous principle, direct reinforcement of learning is unimportant or even counterproductive.
The fact that social learning experiments indicate that humans acquire rules of
behavior supports our intuition that the essence of culture is encoded information
rather than the behaviors that result from this information. As we argued above, a
given cultural rule may lead to different behavior in different environments, much
as a given gene’s effect on phenotype is dependent on environmental contingencies.
This means that culturally acquired information is at least partially protected from
the direct effects of environmental contingencies in a way that is somewhat analogous to genotype. The converse may also be true; a naive individual may be able
to induce the rule that generates a model’s behavior even though the model’s
behavior is changing in response to environmental contingencies. For example,
although the details of political and social behavior organized around ethnic identity
appear to be quite labile, the behavioral disposition toward in-group cooperation
and out-group hostility could at the same time be very stable.
The implications of the social learning school for the understanding of culture
have been forcefully summarized by Rosenthal and Zimmerman (1978: 79):
Because of the emphasis on social observation and feedback as the primary
means by which individuals learn and alter behavior, the continuity of cultural

groups can be easily explained. Tradition and knowledge can be transmitted to

44

The Cultural Inheritance System

the youth who observes the rituals as well as the less formal behavioral practices
of adults. From these modeling sequences, concepts or rules can be abstracted
and refined by social consequences; these cognitions in turn guide the observer
when he reaches adulthood. Witnessed by the next generation, his actions aid
in perpetuating this socially mediated cycle for passing on important information.

Shortcomings of the social learning data

While the data from social learning experiments provide invaluable information
about the mechanisms of cultural transmission, they suffer from two important
drawbacks. First, the time scale of the typical observational learning experiment is
very short, and the importance of the modeled information to the life chances of
the offspring is usually small. The naive child is exposed to a particular modeling
event, for instance a novel grammatical rule, and then shortly thereafter is tested
to see if the rule was acquired. In some experiments the child is tested some time
later to see if the behavior has been retained, but it is not clear whether the same
mechanisms are at work over the longer time scale of the human life cycle. It is also
unclear whether children acquire fundamental beliefs about the social and natural
world at an early age in the same way that they learn novel grammatical forms and
so forth in the laboratory. Clearly, experiments to answer such questions face
severe ethical and practical difficulties, and without the answers we must make the
reasonable inference that the results of the social learning experiments apply over
longer time spans and for more important traits.
Second, social learning experiments have not yet been used to study some of the
details of cultural inheritance that our models suggest may be very important. From
our point of view, the most seriously neglected issue is how a cultural rule that a
given individual acquires is affected by exposure to several modeling episodes
involving different cultural parents. Although such problems are on the agenda of
social learning researchers (Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978: 267-268), typical
social learning experiments involve only one model for a brief period of time. The
exceptions to this generalization involve models with different characteristics (e.g.
male or female, nurturant or nonnurturant) in order to measure the effect of these
characteristics on the imitation of other traits such as aggression (e. g. Bandura et
al., 1963). As far as we are aware, the rule modeled and the modeling situation
have not been varied in a way that addresses the following kinds of questions:

1. What happens when a naive person is exposed to two otherwise similar
models with different rules for behaving in the same environmental circumstance?
Is one model copied and the other ignored? Are the variant rules synthesized in
some way, for example, by averaging? If the naive individual acquires both rules,
what governs which rule is subsequently used?
2. What is the smallest unit of a complex rule that can be independently acquired? Does a complex rule that can be subdivided into smaller parts tend to be
inherited intact from a given model, or are the smallest units freely mixed from
various models?

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

45

The answers to these questions could turn out to be crucial to understanding the
dynamics of cultural inheritance. The analogous questions for the genetic system
were answered with the discovery of Mendel’s laws. The genetic system is particulate, and the laws of independent assortment (modified by linkage) describe the
way genes from two parents are recombined in sexual reproduction. Some claim
that geneticists’ main contribution to Darwinian theory was the discovery of these
properties because, unlike blending inheritance, they act to conserve variation.
Since evolution by the forces of biased transmission and natural selection depends
on the preservation of variation and the size of the units that are transmitted
independently, our ignorance of these structural attributes of cultural inheritance is
a serious gap. We think that the experimental techniques of social learning research
could be profitably applied to these problems.
Other views of social learning
A variety of other theories of social learning have also been advanced. In general,
each of these theories paints a more complicated picture of social learning than does
Bandura’s theory.

1. Some structuralists such as Laughlin and D’Aquili (1974) or Chomsky
(1976) argue for a much larger role for innate structures than do social learning
theorists. In particular, they believe that there are genetically transmitted predispositions to acquire some traits rather than others. For example, they hold that
humans are innately predisposed in favor of certain grammatical rules. In contrast,
social learning theorists believe that the organic capacity to acquire culture is very
general. Grammatical rules are held to be acquired through social learning.
2. Some scholars such as Piaget (1962), Kohlberg (1964), and Yando, Seitz,

and Zigler (1978) place more importance on changes in cognitive abilities with age,
as for example in Piaget’s famous developmental stages. While social learning
theorists acknowledge the importance of development, they suggest that Piagetian
developmental stages may result from the fact that social learning at one age may
often depend on what is acquired via social learning at earlier ages, rather than from
organic development.
3. Some theories place a greater emphasis on affective ties with role models
(e.g. Mowrer, 1960; Aronfreed, 1969). Although social learning theory incorporates attentional phenomena, it gives them less weight than do psychoanalytic
theories that emphasize the role of identification with parents or other individuals
in social learning.
4. Psychological theories which stress basic personality traits as explanatory
variables assume a more complex integration of the cultural repertoire than do
social learning theories. Social learning theorists hypothesize that the skills and
dispositions acquired become more complex and differentiated as the repertoire
grows, but they view an individual as possessing many separate, modular sets of
cultural attributes. Thus Bandura’s prescription for treatment of psychological
disorders is to modify specific incompletely learned or deviant rules, rather than to
search for deeply imbedded, general personality defects that would influence a
large fraction of a deviant’s behavior.

46

The Cultural Inheritance System

5. Social learning theorists assume a smaller role for reinforcement than behaviorists (e.g. Skinner, 1953; Gewirtz, 1971).

The controversies surrounding social learning theory are directly relevant to the
current enterprise because each of the positions implies a different view of cultural
transmission, and therefore of the evolutionary forces that might affect cultural
variation. For example, the cultural evolution hypotheses of many human sociobiologists stress the forces of guided variation and direct bias, and the role of
genetically transmitted traits in shaping the direction of these forces (e.g. Alexander, 1971,

1979a, b; Lumsden

and Wilson,

1981). These views require that

innate biases influence which cultural dispositions are acquired. Thus the usual
sociobiological hypothesis is more consistent with a structuralist view of social
learning than with Bandura’s. In subsequent chapters we will analyze models which
draw out the evolutionary implications that are inherent in these controversies.

Evidence from studies of socialization
Many studies of child development have focused on how child-rearing practices
give rise to various behavioral variations in children through a mixture of modeling
and reinforcement. Since quite basic traits (aggressiveness, helping behavior,
school performance) are related to rearing practices, it appears plausible that cultural transmission is quite important in shaping behavior. Table 3.1 lists a sample
of the studies in this research tradition and a brief account of their results. Child
development textbooks (e.g. Mussen, Conger, and Kagan, 1979) can be consulted
for a much more extensive review than we can give here. Werner (1979) reviews

the cross-cultural evidence on the effects of child rearing.
Baumrind’s (1967) study of the effect of parental practices on children’s
behavior is a good example of the child development approach. She first
categorized 110 nursery school children with respect to five behavioral dimensions:
self-control, approach tendencies (curiosity), subjective mood (happiness), selfreliance, and peer affiliation (friendliness). Three small subgroups of children were
selected for further study. Group 1 included 13 children who scored high in each
of the five dimensions and were judged to be the most mature, competent, and
independent. Group 2 included 11 children who were moderately self-reliant and
self-controlled but scored low on approach tendencies, subjective mood, and peer

affiliation. Group 3 consisted of 8 children who scored low on self-reliance,
self-control, and approach tendencies and who were judged the most immature of
the original group. The child-rearing behavior of the parents of each group was
assessed by naturalistic observations in the home, structured tests, and interviews
of parents. Four dimensions of child-rearing style were evaluated: (1) control
(efforts to influence children’s behavior), (2) maturity demands (parental pressure
on children to perform near the limits of their abilities, but also expectations of
independence), (3) communication (reasoning with children to obtain compliance
and obtaining information about the child’s desires), and (4) nurturance (expressions of warmth and encouragement). The parents of mature children (Group 1)

scored high on all four dimensions. The parents of the children in Group 2 scored
high on the control dimension but low on the nurturance dimension. Parents of the

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

47

Table 3.1 Studies showing effects on children’s behavior of parental rearing
practices

I

Ahlstrom & Havighurst
(1971)

Bacon et al. (1963)

Hetherington (1972)
Hoffman (1971)

Lesser and Kendel
(1969)

Hoffman and Saltzstein
(1967)

Lynn (1974 and 1979)

Maccoby (1980)

Maccoby and Jacklin
(1974)
Simpson (1962)

Compared to controls, boys with persistent delinquency and
failure to respond to work-study opportunities lacked competent male role models and lacked family support for scholastic activity.
Socialization practices in 48 mostly preliterate societies
confirm patterns of association between child-rearing practices and frequency of theft and personal crime. Lack of a
male role model for young children and excessively authoritarian child-rearing practices lead to more criminal behavior.
Father absence has a subtle effect on the socialization of females, and a more substantial one on males. Daughters lack
skills in interactions with males, whereas sons tend to suffer
a wider range of deficits when a male role model is absent.
Danish and Americans show different frequencies of childrearing patterns resulting in different patterns of adolescent

independence. However, the same patterns of child rearing
within each country have the same results.
Parental child-rearing styles or techniques explain much of
the variation in children’s moral development.
Reviews of the role of father’s child-rearing practices on
children of both sexes, and a similar review of both parents’
effects on daughters. Antecendents of sex role typing,
achievement motivation, vocational choice, delinquency,
personality, and other traits.
Sex identity can be assigned by parents (review of several
studies) at least in cases where physiological sex is ambiguous, without apparent problems. This despite the apparent
role of biases in the formation of sex identity. Other evidence indicates a substantial role for parents, particularly fathers, in teaching sex-typed behavior to normal children.
Children learn sex-appropriate behavior in part via parental
socialization.
Parental influence on career aspirations and prospective upward mobility are strong.

immature children (Group 3) scored quite low on the control, maturity demands,
and communication dimensions but relatively high on nurturance. Baumrind (1967)
termed the “competent” Group 1 parents authoritative, the high control Group 2
parents authoritarian, and the lax but nurturant parents of Group 3 permissive.
Subsequent work by Baumrind and others has supported these and similar categorizations (Mussen, Conger, and Kagan,

1979: 445-447).

Werner’s (1979) cross-cultural review of child-rearing attitudes reports a number
of relationships like those uncovered by Baumrind and other investigators in Western countries. Differences between societies in presumably long-standing, tradi-

tional child-rearing practices have substantial effects on the cognitive capabilities
and social behavior of children and adults. Werner presents considerable evidence
that suggests that many societies have patterns reminiscent of Baumrind’s rearing
styles. In many societies mothers play a dominant role in child rearing and obe-

48

The Cultural Inheritance System

dience to strict rules is stressed. In other societies fathers play a greater role in child
rearing and there is a more nurturant family setting. Werner argues that each of
these patterns produce adults who are well adapted to the contrasting ecological
situations in which they live. Traditional or semitraditional stratified agricultural
societies are disproportionately characterized by authoritarian child-rearing patterns. Such practices tend to produce children who are cooperative but not independent or self-assertive, which may be adaptive in societies which are authoritarian
and emphasize cooperation in subsistence activities.
In contrast, less authoritarian parents are characteristic of unstratified agricultural societies, hunters and gatherers, and the middle class of Western industrial

societies. The independent, competitive, but in some respects less socially skilled
individuals produced by such practices appear better adapted to individual enterprise required by the economic and political organization that characterizes such
societies.
The fact that parental child-rearing styles affect children’s behavior is not convincing evidence of cultural transmission. Genetic determinants of warmth or
authoritarianism might exist, or economic conditions might result in certain parental styles regardless of cultural transmission. Further, most studies of this type
focus on behavior at quite different points in the life cycle. It is not entirely clear
whether children’s responses to different parental techniques are the result of
modeling adult behaviors, or whether children will tend to imitate their parents’
child-rearing traits when they become adults. A good deal of the evidence suggests
that both inferences are correct, however. For example, the behavior of Baumrind’s

Group | children seems to be a nursery school age approximation of their parents’
behavior toward them, a finding that is consistent with the picture of social learning
drawn from laboratory studies. Other studies suggest that parental rearing behavior
is indeed transmitted from parents to offspring. For example, parents who abuse
children very frequently grew up in households where physical violence was used
to enforce discipline (Spinetta and Rigler, 1972; Smith, 1975). Werner (1979:
300-303) reviews several studies suggesting that child-rearing patterns persist in
the face of considerable social change. More narrowly, even if studies of parental
style are insufficient to rule out genetic or correlated environmental explanations of
parent-offspring similarities, they do show the pattern that would be predicted
based on a social learning—cultural transmission hypothesis.

An overview of evidence from psychometric and sociological studies

The phenotypes of genetic relatives are usually positively correlated. For example,
siblings, even siblings raised apart, are generally more similar in height than two
individuals randomly chosen from the population. This fact has proven
to be
extremely useful for obtaining empirical information about the genetic
basis of
various characters, particularly in the practical world of plant and animal
breeding.
The experiments and observations of psychologists interested in social learning
and
child development reviewed above suggest that social learning in the
human species

is much like an inheritance system. If this view is correct,
we should be able to
observe statistical similarities in the behavior of “cultural relatives,
” that is, indi-

viduals who share some cultural models.

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

49

Psychologists and sociologists have extensively studied the behavioral similarity
between various classes of individuals in human populations. Three general kinds
of traits have been studied within this tradition: (1) psychological traits such as
measures of cognitive ability, measures of personality and temperament, and tendency toward psychopathology, (2) sociological traits including criminal behavior
and attitudes toward religious and political issues, and (3) interests, especially

occupational choice. The bulk of these studies have been undertaken without any
explicit model of cultural inheritance in mind. Most investigators have lumped the
effects of cultural transmission with the effects of correlated environments.
There are several difficulties involved in using such data to estimate the
importance of cultural transmission. Many of these data deal with the similarity
between biological relatives, presumably because these data are the easiest to collect. Although the measured familial correlations are often quite high, their
significance is ambiguous because the effects of genetic and cultural transmission
and common family environment tend to be confounded. The data from unrelated
individuals are much less complete and generally less quantitative, and the effects
of correlated environments can rarely be excluded.
Nonetheless, we think the data are useful taken as a whole. The familial data can

be used to estimate the importance of vertical cultural transmission for two reasons:
first, in the most recent studies, sophisticated quantitative methods have been used
to disentangle the effects of genes, culture, and environment. Though far from
conclusive, these studies suggest that cultural transmission is important for at least
some of the traits studied. Second, many studies show very high familial correlations for characters like religious preference that are unlikely to be genetic. In
the case of nonfamilial effects, while none of the studies of nonfamilial effects

unambiguously indicates horizontal or oblique cultural transmission, taken together
they suggest, to us at least, that these modes of transmission are important.
Evidence from familial correlations
The results of a variety of studies of the similarity of biological relatives, mostly
between parents and offspring, for various traits are given in Table 3.2. These data
show that the correlations between parents and offspring for behavioral traits are
often quite high. If the effects of genetic transmission or common, nontransmissible
family environments could be excluded, these data would provide strong evidence
that cultural inheritance exists. While this is not possible, several lines of evidence
do indicate that, for some traits at least, there is an important cultural component.

The results of traditional psychometric studies of psychological traits such as IQ
indicated that genetic variation was quite important compared to cultural or environmental variation. These studies generally relied on data comparing identical
twins with other siblings, particularly dizygotic twins. If twins are raised together
and can be assumed to have a common environment, then the genetic contribution
to a trait can be estimated by comparing the correlation between identical twins with
that between dizygotic twins. If the twins are reared separately, the data can also
be used to estimate the effect of different family environments. Some of this latter
kind of variation could be interpreted as being due to vertical transmission. In
practice, twin studies suffer from a number of potential defects, and the traditional

50

The Cultural Inheritance System

Table 3.2 Studies showing evidence of vertical transmission
Bachman (1970)
Bachman et al. (1978)

Blau (1965)
Duncan (1965)
Lipset and Bendix

(1964)
Block (1973)

Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1981)
Cavalli-Sforza et al.
(1982)
Chen et al. (1982)

Coopersmith (1967)

Glass and Hall (1954)

Flacks (1967)

Hagman (1932)

Jessor and Jessor

(1977)

Longitudinal study of males from high school to young
adulthood. Most of the personality variables, attitudes, and
attainments studied were related to family background. Stability from high school age to young adulthood of most variables considerable.
Sons tend to have the same occupational status as their fathers in industrial countries. Net upward mobility is substantial, but both upwardly and downwardly mobile sons tend to
rise or fall to a status close to their fathers’.
Variations in sex role conceptions within and between societies appear to reflect patterns of socialization that replicate
parents’ role conceptions.
Surveys of college students and their parents used to obtain
data on parent-offspring resemblances for a number of traits.
Transmission matrices displayed and analyzed.

Children with high self-esteem have parents with high selfesteem. Parents whose self-esteem is high also tend to be
models of effective techniques to deal with everyday problems.
Mobility between occupational roles in Britain, as later
found in the U.S., is far less than a perfect mobility model
predicts. Sons are typically of the same or similar status as
their fathers.
Politically active students of the 1960s tended strongly to
have liberal to radical parents, compared to nonactive students.
Children’s fears of dogs, insects, storms, and so forth are
significantly related to mothers’ fears. The number of
mothers’ and children’s fears were correlated at the 0.67
level, and mothers and children showed a significant tendency to have the same fears.
Maternal ideology had a reasonable correlation with frequency of problem behavior in high school students. The
children of traditional, religious, and tolerant mothers were

Kirkpatrick (1936)

less prone to marijuana use, alcohol abuse, sexual activity,
and activism than children of other types of mothers.
Modest correlations between mothers’ and children’s attitudes toward feminism (r = 0.38—0.34); insignificant re-

McCall (1977)

Newcomb

and Svehla

(1937)

Rice et al. (1980)

lationships between fathers’ and children’s scores. Sharply
higher values reported for parent-offspring correlations for
religious attitudes.
Offspring attained adult education and occupational status
correlated with parent’s education and occupational status
(r ~ 0.6). No independent effect of IQ.
Parents’ and children’s attitudes toward church, war, and
communism are correlated, (r = 0.4—0.7).

Estimates of heritability of IQ from family resemblance data
indicate that approximately 30 percent of the variance in IQ
is due to cultural inheritance.

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

51

Table 3.2 continued
Roff (1950)

Review of a number of early statistical studies of parent-

Scarr and Weinberg

offspring and other intrafamily correlations for behavioral
traits. Virtually all measures show at least some parentoffspring correlation.
Transracial adoptions of black children into privileged white

(1976)

Schiff et al. (1978)

Smith (1975)

Vogel et al. (1970)

Werts (1968)

Weltman and Remmers
(1946)

Whiting and Whiting
(1975)

families result in black children’s having IQs above white

norms. Apparently the racial differences in IQ in the U.S.
are due to cultural transmission or correlated environments.
Evidence from early adoption study shows that rates of
school failure and of low IQ among adoptees compared with
siblings raised by biological parents are entirely attributable
to the socialization, not the biological parents.
A significant association exists between the tendency to
abuse one’s own children and having been subjected to
severe physical punishment by one’s parents; apparently such
parents lack effective models of child-rearing behavior.
Sex role perceptions of college students affected by mother’s
employment status. Students whose mothers were employed
view appropriate sex roles as less different.
College freshmen’s indication of their occupational choice
showed significant pattern of sons choosing the same or similar occupations as their fathers.
_ Attitude survey administered to high school students and
their parents. Items tested included educational, political,

and social items. Very high parent-offspring correlations
found, with some decline between grades 9 and 11-12.
Cross-cultural study of socialization practices and children’s
behavior. Children’s behavior reflects the need to acquire
skills that will be useful in adult roles; socialization is train-

ing for adult roles. Some indirect indication that vertical
transmission is important relative to other models.
studies have been sharply criticized (e.g. Layzer, 1974; Feldman and Lewontin,

1975).
However, more recent studies of psychological traits (Henderson, 1982) indicate
a much smaller role for genetic effects. In these studies, more kinds of relatives
have been considered and more care has been taken to measure such complicating
factors as nonrandom mating, selective placement of adoptees, and cultural and
environmental effects. New models have also been formulated that incorporate
specific propositions about the effects of environmental and heritable cultural
effects (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1973b, 1981: Chap. 5; Eaves et al., 1978;
Rice et al., 1978; Cloninger et al., 1979a, 1979b; Karlin, 1980). In the much-

analyzed case of IQ, the traditional models yielded estimates of genetic heritability
in the neighborhood of 0.8. The availability of new and better data has reduced
these estimates to roughly 0.5 (Henderson, 1982). When models with more com-

plete specification of cultural transmission are used, typical results are that genetic
variation, cultural variation, and nontransmissible environmental variation each
explain about a third of the total variation in IQ (Rice et al., 1980; see also

52

The Cultural Inheritance System

Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,

1978). For another character, Young et al. (1980)

concluded that familial correlations on the “lie” scale of the Eysenck Personality
Questionnaire were almost entirely due to cultural effects.

(The lie scale may

actually measure conformance to convention or degree of self-insight rather than
propensity to dissemble.) It is equally true, however, that the best evidence still
suggests that genetic variation plays a major role in explaining the variation in other
personality traits (Scarr, 1981; Henderson,

1982).

As has long been recognized (Cattell, 1960), very extensive data are necessary
to evaluate complicated models of human development realistically. The new
models highlight this problem, and the older tendency to consider a reasonable fit
to a purely genetic model as evidence of genetic transmission has given way to more
cautious interpretations based on the realization that equally plausible cultural
models may explain the same data. Often all that may be safely said is that there
is a strong familial effect composed of an unknown mixture of genetic and cultural
transmission

and common

family environment

(Rice et al., 1980; Henderson,

1982). Improved data coupled with sophisticated models promise to continue to
increase the accuracy with which the genetic, cultural, and environmental components of familial correlations can be distinguished. In the meantime, we take
some comfort from the fact that cultural variation must now be invoked to explain
variation that was once attributed to genes.
Sociological traits like skills, norms, and political and religious attitudes seem
to us much less likely to be genetically acquired than basic psychological characteristics. Assuming that the reader agrees with this assessment, the observed parentoffspring correlations provide evidence of vertical cultural transmission. Unfortunately, recent psychometric studies have largely ignored these kinds of
characters. However, the early literature in this area showed quite high parentoffspring and sibling correlations for this latter class of traits (see Fuller and
Thompson, 1960, for a review). For example, Newcombe and Svehla (1937)
measured first-degree family correlations from 0.57 to 0.76 for attitudes toward
religion. This correlation is so high that the somewhat lower parent-offspring
correlations indicate other transmission or decision effects. The highest measures
of parent-offspring correlation for traits of this type are for political party
affiliation, 0.80 to 0.94 (Weltmann and Remmers,

show

1946). Occupational interests

similar, although generally lower, parent-offspring

correlations

(Werts,

1968). Besides a general occupation and class effect, Werts’s data also show a

specific relationship between upward and downward occupational mobility and
parental attitudes within classes. High-achieving children from lower-class families
have parents who actively encourage and support their children’s achievements,
low-achieving children from middle-class families did not encourage their children,
and so forth.
The unequal importance of mothers and fathers also gives evidence of cultural
transmission. In many of the studies cited above, mother-offspring correlations are
slightly higher than father-offspring correlations, an expected pattern in cultural
transmission given the greater involvement of women in child rearing. The extensive studies of personality and mental and moral defects (Fuller and Thompson,
1978, give a long review) also often show that mothers and offspring have higher

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

53

correlations for personality traits than do fathers and offspring, a finding that is
consistent with cultural models but not with genetic ones.

Evidence for horizontal and oblique transmission
The hypothesis that a substantial proportion of behavioral variation in humans is
culturally transmitted is supported by the evidence that a significant fraction of an
individual’s cultural repertoire is acquired by horizontal (from peers) and oblique
(from nonparental adults) transmission. As the psychometric studies show, it is
difficult to disentangle vertical cultural transmission from genetic transmission.
Biological parents are usually extremely salient models for cultural transmission,
especially to younger children. Nevertheless, social learning from friends, teachers, various nonparental relatives and admired public figures is expected to occur,
especially as children grow up. Some data do support the intuitive impression that
biological parents gradually become less important through adolescence and as
children move from their natal household. Table 3.3 reproduces data (Bell, 1969)

from a longitudinal study of adolescents’ and young adults’ self reports of the
perceived influence of various categories of people.
Unfortunately, the effects of models outside the household are more diffuse and
more difficult to measure than familial influences. Subjects selected for study can
usually provide the experimenter with access to parents and siblings, whereas other
potential models are harder to identify and contact. The result of this methodological difficulty is that the amount of horizontal and oblique transmission is
probably underestimated by the available data. Also, a fair fraction of horizontal
and oblique effects are likely to contribute to the measured parent-offspring correlation because of assortative “mating.” Even a teenager’s peers are likely to be
drawn from the same social class, neighborhood, religious group, and so forth as
his biological parents.
Table 3.4 summarizes the results of a sample of the studies measuring horizontal
and oblique effects. Comparing Table 3.4 with Table 3.2 shows that some traits

Table 3.3 The relative importance of horizontal and oblique transmission at different ages
Social Role

Grade 9

Grade 19

Father
Mother
Parent Substitute
Sibling
Peer
Teacher
Adult Relative
Other Adult

98
79
i]
42
8
5
DS
9

714
26
10
24
54
25
68
36

Employer

0

74|

Note: These data from Bell (1969) suggest that horizontal and oblique transmission increase in
importance as children grow older. A group of boys were interviewed when they were freshmen in high
school (grade 9) and then interviewed again when they had been out of high school for seven years.
The table gives the total number of times individuals in different social roles were mentioned as role
models.

WH

Ee CHAE Aree hater

Dale Aad Nation Mowing evtoaoe of horontal or oblique cultural transmission
Yealy (LNA)

Yeah (LO)

PAR (EOD

ee (QO)

Wee RAD

Pears af AWA sehoot age stuctoats Rave some independent ef
RA AR SORT FRODRTRY agparations,
WYANHAS OF VATIONS Fae Padtels for males in grade
age 2) evahaatedt
fram subjects” self reports, Parents
and ib
WARN ANT AMROE FOROS Were Overwhekingly i
gra & By age 25
\, feaohors, ceaployers,
and “other
at Wow POPOL mUh WOKS important,
A URW af Rear Bxlopoadiont studios fouad that part of the
VATE
BA AWA SOKO! stuclonts’ agpirations could be attrib.
WANE BO GARRY OF BO Soho! program aad to peer effects,
YOAV Ew DAVEE
PREY Karaedd Bow sidltags, particularly
Sees
Ne
IEE AYR PR

AQ Raat WB We~AK Af Ayipodherioal choices, adolescents Con:
One SPU Ceeee UIE Obra eee ee
RWAQVOAL WER Dae docs Comsoqueaces,
The opposite classes

WE RAW APOE RECORAORY & paroasal BOTs.

Fede gaan CEN)

rales (OED

SrS VaderAfSQuige saniegy effdetively spread
by the school

ANARAAA, ONO BAN
Qhalrew Wachwg those values to par
BAN COMAWR MO LS.

CYANWEANE
Sas! Evidioaoe Mat TV violeace induces
ARS BASEONNE ROANOKE adlEQlesoenes.
Toes agente of wireless \ebnveer Sennactein’ i eecary
WOQE SOGOU a SOCK, loaMAAg Study
Rover
cociatiaation e@Rets 0a & number oftraits,
WOR, CARS af Veuager chug, older childrea, and sib-

ene Nearer anekSeseeee ‘wiihpereaial ehenncianties at
Senn te
eee
WAKA ARUIRE Q\OSUED EST UR a MOOR atttude set. Post
WRRGONT QYLUET | meeemizing uniueaces strong.
NRA BAS tA CARD

DRAW VO ERO DX aaddle
SERRA
AW Salgren'S

ass:
SS experimenters ia2o im Sheol
and on

CALE HOE EOEY GS. ASO Somme evideeee
foe horizontal

RRNQANG (RD

SRR

Gg

DE ChiUren.

M & Wow Rammng Gudy of Young children,
peers served
SRCONE HAR IREWEAPON

FRR EDD

ONSRRO NEN

SPRRMUS wath QPEESD COMMUTES DYVarL

© ANKE NGS

Rand read occurs egpenially because

Ws Dee QA Doom
SRN

. SON)

andonnaanatiinin

ain QQaQuE

CNN RQUR Sich det wee eee
waren care taeceean, Renee eatceimeet
WRAGIR A SHEN ASOT,
WA, and
of m-

DAD

HED EN BARRY The apparend

AEN GIN DOOEN

LPS BNE OS

ZRW_ |RA_ EVD

ae

Sous ate AS

SO

tee

Ai OtuaIS are Gansenitted trem older to

SHES THANE

ae

SRHATANE COOOL chilientatia AG.

ten Some tradi-~

Shier appear we

Wane

henen of Data from the Wid Wien“

Table 3,4 continued
v
972)

and Vein

Kenenvan A a, 06)

Children ayuire incidental teavions trom a modes wien
ickin
4 tener,
g vor wid vxia Caer of the Wh caw
variation ni the Alert,
= Onihdven tend Wo adhere
4 aihe mend worm nihy when

BAUM HeHed txnh rember and practices the nnn. Srv
aly, Ven 4 review 0h the many 7

nines With

WOU Hurtels
and Wild, we boner
and Dineen,
197%.)

Simpoom (NHUZ)
Vande and Kagan
(S04)

Yankovic (974)
Vatrow & a, 974)

Young
& al.(9M)

Layne 0d Natu
(1975)

AMthensgh feed
par
daar ae ae
wh iepentend
una imAniiity ate Atinng,
merdive
or
/
a trends detected,
he
, theAive tenens cael 4 dentine in
'o wnpeivencs ater woreda munities im the textueny
Naan xn,
Trends im wrvey data wiyyerd thd Gragg, end noni
ath wxval Valuer yer
ann, UME YHA a open
to momanene yonith with a tine ag A4S YOu,
COMAMIA atic tain Was dathy (6 mentins Wh belay) trannies
Childven try iwhels whe Ah Comme
nicMeh atruidc tiles and msually rave drnhicalyw

the Children and nhers,
Veycunneatic analywis A Ne whe dda OMEA on twits
and then parents drs 4 drome Atos A wri nner
ahuns anny, twits Gan YANO tite oh yates,
The dechine in M) wits rth onder 6 OH oy4 1)
in win
citings wtuenn ms Mens |
MeV nye,

acxuired by horizontal and oblique transminiom are qualitatively Gitteren trom
those acyuired vertically, Yor example, Opie
and Opie NIV, 19, 1976) demu
mem a childhood complex of sayings, rituals, and games tha ae tromsnitied
among peers and remain remarkably “able for many years. Whany Aner waits to
are alsmunt certainly strongly influenced by vertical tanunission alo Show de
tectable horizontal and oblique Aters, including \anguage, uccunal ond caret
oyetives, IQ, and vex-tole benavion. While these data do th comtione 2 thiggroms
test
of the cultural transmission hypothesis, they are mune commitent with * than
with a large role for genctic transmission A 4 grea range fh unportam beaiiond
traits,

Though the psychometric and uxiological evidence is unedtishacory in many
ways, it clearly supports the hypothesis that cultural tranunissiom
acts Vike an
inheritance system. The calculated heritabilities for busnan behavioral traits ae as
high as or higher than measurements for benavienal and her phemny pic Characters
in natural populations
of noncultural organisms (e.g. Armodd, 1961, Cneverud,
1942), Thus, it may be that cultural transmission is os moude and stable 4
mechnaniom
of inheritance as genes. Since wxial learning experiments
and Cild
development studies support the vame conclusion, we fee) tia the “ieritance
system” conception of culture is adequate.

56

The Cultural Inheritance System

Accounting for the variation between groups
So far we have been concerned with how the psychometric and sociological data
can be used to partition behavioral variation observed within groups into genetic,
cultural, and environmental components. The same kind of data have been used to
evaluate the importance of genetic, cultural, and environmental variation in explaining the variation between groups. While only a handful of traits have been well
studied, the conclusion of this work so far is that genetic variation underlies
virtually none of the behavioral variation between groups. In the next section we
will cite sociological and anthropological evidence which suggests that environmental variation is inadequate to explain all differences between human groups. In
combination, this evidence indicates an important role for culture in determining
between-group variation.
Once again the best data come from IQ studies. There is considerable evidence
that little or none of the variation in IQ between racial groups can be attributed to
genetic variation. Scarr and her colleagues (Scarr and Weinberg, 1976; Scarr et al.,
1977; Scarr and Barker, 1981) have studied the variation in IQ between blacks and

whites in the United States using three different sets of data: interracial adoptions,
measurements of intellectual skills among individuals classified as black but with
varying amounts of European ancestry, and a comparison of cultural and genetic
effects on IQ in black and white twins. All three studies indicate that there is no
genetic component to interracial variation in IQ. Black children adopted by advantaged white families have IQs above the mean for whites, the proportion of European ancestry is not correlated with measures of intellectual performance, and more
of the variation in the IQ of blacks can be explained by cultural and environmental
factors than can the variation in the IQ of whites. These facts are consistent with
the hypothesis that the differences between the mean IQ of blacks and whites result
from cultural and environmental differences between the two groups. This can be
true even if variation within each group has a substantial genetic component.
The cultural analog of phylogenetic inertia

If culture acts like an inheritance system, there should be the analog of phylogenetic
inertia for culturally acquired traits. That is, cultural traditions should not change
instantly in response to changing environmental conditions. Rather, history should
explain a significant fraction of present behavior and a common past should cause
significant similarities between societies. We shall refer to this as “cultural inertia.”
Alexander (1979a: 76) has argued that, “Unlike

a gene, a cultural trait can be

suddenly abolished, and just as suddenly reinstated, across the whole population.
At least in theory this can be done.” Fads and fashions in Western societies almost
fit this characterization. However, there is overwhelming evidence from many
branches of the social sciences that most cultural traits persist for much longer than
a human generation (Shils, 1981). Even the rapid spread of technological innovations in recent times via horizontal transmission is characterized by a definite
pattern of historical change, albeit on a shorter time scale. Let us now consider

some examples of the kind of data that can be used to estimate the strength of
cultural inertia.

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

57

The ethnographic attitude toward rates of cultural change is expressed in the
artifice of the “ethnographic present.” Classical ethnography gives a present tense
description of a society’s culture that purports to represent a stable, traditional way
of life. This conceit is based on the assumption that, in the absence of contact with

a drastically different dominant society, cultures change very slowly. Since ethnographers rarely can observe rates of change under precontact conditions, the
assumption is usually unverified.
Nonetheless, ethnographic accounts sometimes offer significant-circumstantial
evidence of the stability of cultural inheritance. A classical example is the contrast
between the Melanesian and Polynesian occupants of the islands of the Western
Pacific (Sahlins, 1963; Orlove, 1980). These two only distantly related groups have

inhabited the volcanic and coral atoll islands of this region for many generations.
Within the two groups, the size, isolation, and other ecological conditions of the

islands occupied are fairly variable, but both groups occupy a similar range of
islands. If cultural attributes were modified rapidly in response to environmental
conditions, one would expect that most cultural variation would be present within
the two groups, and the historical differences between the two should explain very
little. The evidence indicates, however, that substantial differences have persisted

between Polynesians and Melanesians. For example, Polynesian political organization is based on a system of ranked lineages, while Melanesians are characterized by a big-man system with free competition for political roles. As a consequence, Polynesians developed elaborate states on larger islands, headed by a
hereditary king and governed with the aid of a series of specialists—soldiers and
priests. In contrast, even on very large islands Melanesian political organization
tends to remain small scale and societies unstratified.
Even when strong ecological pressure and the opportunity for diffusion of traits
from one society to another combine to cause rapid cultural evolution, the effects
of cultural inertia are detectable. Oliver (1962) discusses the case of the Plains

Indians. After acquiring horses and guns, a number of previously horticultural and
food-foraging peoples rapidly developed the familiar complex of traits surrounding
nomadic horse hunting. A large number of specific traits entered into this adaptive
complex over a span of perhaps 200 years, including patterns of social organization
that were substantially different from the preexisting ones. Different parts of the
complex were developed by different tribes and acquired by others by diffusion.
Some groups, like the Apache, who acquired some parts of the complex (the
Apache acquired the use of horses) but not others (the Apache did not abandon
horticulture to become fully nomadic), were driven from the Plains by nomads
whose way of life gave them superior military capabilities. By the early nineteenth
century, the Plains were dominated by a group of tribes with a common basic
pattern of adaptation. Nevertheless, important differences due to cultural tradition
persisted. For example, tribes derived from horticultural ancestors had significantly
more elaborate political traditions than those derived from food-foraging backgrounds.
Edgerton’s (with Goldschmidt, 1971) study of four East African peoples
quantified the relative importance of cultural background and ecological
circumstances on a variety of psychological variables. Each of the four tribes in-

58

The Cultural Inheritance System

cluded subgroups with widely differing mixes of cattle raising and farming in their
subsistence economy. Two settlements in each of the four tribal areas were selected
for study; in one farming was strongly emphasized, in the other pastoralism was
emphasized. The environments of the four farming sites were quite similar, they
were moist, cool, high elevation areas. Likewise, the areas in which pastoralism
predominated were hot, semiarid lowlands. In terms of subsistence technology and
ecological circumstances these two types of sites were near the extremes experienced by traditional African societies. All of the groups studied apparently moved
to their present location from areas where a more evenly mixed farming-herding life
was possible a few generations in the past, although precise historical control was
not possible. Some contact with the larger tribal culture was maintained in each
case. All four groups had minimal exposure to European acculturation.
In each of the four locations, Edgerton administered an extensive interview
battery to a sample composed of about 60 married adults, half men and half women.
The interview battery consisted of a series of projective psychological tests designed to tap values, attitudes, and feelings. For example, in his picture test,
Edgerton presented a series of drawings that represented possible situations in
which a subject might find himself or herself. Subjects were then asked to describe
what was happening in the picture, and what ought to be happening. Pictures
included situations such as a father confronting a misbehaving son, cattle damaging
a farmer’s maize, and a man either watching or interceding in a fight between two
men. The results of the interviews were reduced to quantitative data by coding
interview responses into nominal categories, for example, the number of times that
respect for authority was mentioned in response to a question. In all, 116 primary
response items, plus an additional 31 content analysis categories that included
casual responses as well as direct responses to questions, were available for each
subject. A variety of multivariate statistical techniques were applied to the data in
order to estimate the effects of tribal group, ecological circumstances, European
acculturation, age, and sex on the patterns of responses.

Edgerton’s data permit a reasonably critical assessment of hypotheses regarding
stability of cultural transmission as an inheritance system. If cultural transmission
is less important than learning and rational calculation, we would expect that
differences in responses should be explained largely in terms of ecological circumstance and subsistence technology; the pastoralists of all four tribes should resemble
one another more than they resemble their co-tribesmen. If culture forms a stable
system of inheritance subject to generally weak evolutionary forces, we should
observe a substantial resemblance within tribes regardless of subsistence technology and ecological circumstance, but also some weak convergence of the attitudes, values, and feelings of farmers, and of pastoralists, regardless of tribe.
Edgerton’s data strongly support the latter expectation. As Edgerton (with
Goldschmidt,

1971: 273) summarizes,

While it is true . . . that the variance in most of the variables is better accounted for by tribe than by economic mode, it is nevertheless also true that for
almost all of these variables we would err in rejecting the null hypothesis that
farmers and pastoralists do nor differ only 5 times or fewer times in 10,000.

Many of the analyses of variance of the content analysis data also show marked

Review of Data from the Social Sciences

59

interaction effects between economic mode and tribal affiliation, as if preexisting
cultural traits had a substantial effect on the manner in which different tribes
responded to the two economic circumstances. Nor should it be thought that the
psychological traits distinguishing the four tribal groups were trivial or adaptively
unimportant. They include such basic behavioral dispositions as attitudes toward
sex, kinsmen, aggression, cattle, land, family size, and authority.

Edgerton also analyzed similarities and differences for a superordinate
classification of the tribes into Bantu and Nilotic groups. Two of the tribes studied
were Bantu and two were Kalenjin, a Nilotic subgroup. Even within these very
broad cultural/ethnic classifications, 12 responses showed statistically significant
Bantu/Kalenjin differences. These included such potentially important traits as
expectations about military prowess, preferences for sex of children, attitudes
toward in-group authority, attitudes toward land, and valuation of work.
Quantitative sociological studies of the attitudes and behavior of members of
different immigrant groups in the United States indicate that differences in some
traits due to national origin persist for several generations. Like the disparate
behaviors of Melanesians and Polynesians, and the behaviors of the various African
groups, these data suggest that differences between groups are not solely environmental. Greeley and McCready (1975) used survey data to compare Anglo-Saxon,
Irish, and Italian Americans for personality, political participation, attitudes on
moral issues, respect for democracy, and attitudes toward family. They generated
a series of hypotheses from sociological studies of areas in Ireland and Italy that
contributed disproportionately to American immigration, under the assumption that
the mother-country culture would make a detectable contribution to differences
between immigrant ethnic groups even several generations after they arrived in the
United States. Their data showed substantial differences among the three ethnic
groups studied. Many, but by no means all, of these differences corresponded to
the predictions based on the culture of origin. For example, Greeley and McCready
predicted that the high level of political activity and sophistication of the Western
Irish compared to the low level in southern Italy should have resulted in higher
levels of political participation by Irish immigrants. Six of their nine specific
hypotheses along these lines were confirmed. Also, for both Irish and Italian
Americans there was a weak correlation of political activity with number of generations that a particular individual’s family had been in the United States.
If cultural inertia causes a substantial lag in response to new environments, we
expect to observe not only the persistence of old traits in new environments but also
different responses on the part of historically different groups to new circumstances.
When such groups are confronted with novel environmental circumstances, we
might expect some to manifest the phenomenon of “preadaptation”; groups which
by the chance of history have one set of cultural variants may be more successful
than others with different variants. A natural experiment to test for the existence of
this effect has unfortunately been repeated many times in the past few centuries as
European colonialization and trading activities suddenly brought non-Western peoples into contact with an entirely different political and economic system. Responses to this change have varied widely from group to group, and cultural
preadaptation is one of the hypotheses offered to explain these differences.
LeVine (1966) considered how the precontact status and mobility system pro-

60

The Cultural Inheritance System

vides the basis for preadaptation to the entrepreneurial and commercial opportunities created by contact with the West. In his important comparative work in
Nigeria, LeVine measured “need for achievement,” a psychological trait hypothesized to be important in roles in a modernizing economy. He found that members
of the Ibo tribe in Nigeria, whose precontact social structures emphasized achieved
status, were also characterized by high individual achievement needs. People from
these groups were disproportionately successful in the modernizing sectors of the
Nigerian economy. By contrast, groups that had the most strongly ascribed hereditary statuses (Hausa) had lower measured needs for achievement and lower participation in the modernizing sectors. Le Vine’s hypothesis has been used to explain
the remarkable speed with which some New Guinea peoples have entered the
modern economy (Finney, 1972; also see Epstein, 1968; Pospisil, 1978).
Archaeological evidence also gives direct, if rather sketchy, evidence that culturally transmitted traits can persist for a long time. Archaeologists frequently use
artifact traditions to reconstruct the spread of populations, and ethnographers and
linguists use similarities between artifacts and language to estimate the historical
relationship between contemporary societies. As with the analogous use of anatomical resemblances of contemporary animals and fossils to reconstruct phylogenetic and biogeographical history by biologists, the evidence is seldom perfect.
However, in both cases it is sufficient to rule out frequent instantaneous creation
and re-creation of cultural traits. To judge by the use of named cultural traditions,
induced from durable artifacts, a typical item in an individual’s cultural repertoire
persists much longer than his own lifetime. Sometimes it seems plausible that such
traditions have persisted even in the face of radically changing environments.
Perhaps the most striking examples of this phenomenon are the Oldolwan and
Acheulean tool traditions, which apparently lasted hundreds of thousands of years
over wide geographic regions and persisted through the extreme climatic
fluctuations of the early and mid Pleistocene (Isaac, 1976). The “life expectancy”
of Pleistocene mammal species is only a factor of two or three longer than the
duration of these tool traditions (Stanley, 1979; Schopf,

1982).

An enormous amount of circumstantial evidence suggests that culturally
transmitted traits are stable over time and in the face of changing environments. As
we develop the models of this book we will be able to say more specific, and
interesting, things about this process.
Models of Cultural Transmission

In the remainder of this chapter we want to translate these findings from the social
sciences into simple mathematical models of cultural transmission. In Chapter 1 we
promised to make use of the analogy between genetic and cultural inheritance in
building such models. Now we will digress for a moment to discuss the structure
of genetic inheritance. The purpose of this digression is twofold. First, we hope to
give our readers from the social sciences a feeling for the techniques that population
geneticists use to analyze organic evolution. Second, we want to emphasize in the
clearest way those features of genetic inheritance that make the analogy with culture
plausible.

Models of Cultural Transmission

61

A simple model from population genetics
Let us consider the evolution at a single genetic locus of a haploid sexual organism.
Such organisms actually exist (e.g. many fungi), but they are relatively rare compared to diploid organisms. We have chosen this kind of model for two reasons:

(1) it is the simplest model with the qualitative features we want to illustrate, and

(2) there are many circumstances in which the behavior of more complex genetical
models can be approximated by a haploid sexual model. This approximation is the
basis of the “modifier” or “evolutionarily stable strategy” approach that is widely
used in evolutionary ecology (Maynard Smith, 1978; Slatkin, 1978). We will make
frequent use of the modifier approach in subsequent chapters.
We will suppose that two genetic variants or “alleles,” labeled a and b, are
present in the population. Further suppose that at the time we census the population
there are a number of individuals, N,, in the population who are characterized by
allele a and a number, N,, who are characterized by allele b. We define the

frequency of the allele a in the population, q, as follows:

q

Na

“NN

oa

The frequency of b is, of course, 1 — q. In Chapter 1 we argued that in a noncultural species evolution usually can be understood in terms of changes in the
distribution of genotypes alone. In this simple model the distribution of genotypes
can be specified by the frequency of either allele. (We have arbitrarily chosen a.)
Thus to characterize the evolution of the population, a model must allow us to
predict the frequency of a during future generations. To do this we must derive a
tule that allows us to predict q in the next generation, given the value of q this
generation. Such a rule is called a “recursion.” As explained in Chapter 2, a
recursion can, in principle at least, predict the frequency of the allele a during any
future generation.
To derive the recursion, the life cycle of the organism is divided into a series of
discrete stages; at each stage we keep track of the change in q. There are four
genotypically distinct sets of parents. For example, one set of parents might consist
of a female who carries the allele a and a male who carries b, in another set both

parents carry the b allele, and so on. The “transmission rule” specifies the probability that a particular set of parents has an offspring characterized by genotype a.
The transmission rule that is appropriate for a haploid sexual organism is given in
Table 3.5.
Table 3.5 Transmission rule for haploid genetic transmission
Set of Models

Probability That the Naive
Individual Is Genotype

M

If

a

b

a
a
b

a
b
a

1
1/2
1/2

0
ilyhye
172

b

b

0

1

62

The Cultural Inheritance System

Let us denote the frequency of the allele a after transmission q’. If the population
is very large then q’ is equal to
Probability

Probability

q’ = (1)| of ana X a} + (1/2)| of ana X b
mating

mating

ie:

(3.2)

arab]
+ aa(orrn Xa
mating

If the population is not large, then the value of q’ is no longer certain; sampling
error in the transmission of a from one generation to the next will cause q’ to vary
randomly. In this case the value of q’ calculated using Equation 3.2 will be the
expected, or average, frequency after transmission. In the simplest models it is
assumed that mating occurs at random, that is, the frequency of a X a matings is
equal to the product of the parental frequencies, q°. This means that Equation 3.2
becomes

q’ = (Iq? + (1/2)q(1 — g) + (1/2). — qq

(3.3)

which after a little algebra becomes

Te)

|

(3.4)

Equation 3.4 says that when mating occurs at random in a large population,
genetic transmission leaves the frequencies of different alleles unchanged. This
remarkable fact is true in almost all genetic models, and it is responsible for many
of the important properties of genetic evolution.
The forces of genetic evolution are the result of various events during the lives
of organisms that differentially affect individuals with different genotypes, and
thereby change the frequency of different alleles. There are many such forces, but
in this simple example we consider only mutation. A variety of factors cause alleles
to mutate occasionally. Suppose that the probability that an allele a mutates to allele
b is , and the probability that b mutates to a is ,. Denote the frequency of the
allele a after mutation as q”. To calculate q”, subtract from q’ the frequency of
individuals who mutate from a to b and add the frequency of individuals who mutate
from b to a as follows:

(PEP

Ma TGs

ad Bia hoes

(3.5)

Because it was assumed that mutation isthe only force changing the frequency
of genotypes, q” is also the frequency of the genotype a among the parents of the
next generation, q’. Thus (recalling that q = q’), the recursion for the frequency
of allele a is

q = G—"gu +

a)

(3.6)

Models of Cultural Transmission

63

This recursion can be used to predict the frequency of a during any future time
period. We are frequently interested in calculating the equilibrium frequency of
different genotypes in the population. When a population is in equilibrium the gene
frequencies do not change. This means that q = q’. The equilibrium frequency of
a, denoted q, can be found by solving the simple equation

C=]

dtc

= qu.

(3.7)

or

Re
=

=
Ma

Mp
Ts Mp

3.8
(

)

The equilibrium frequency of the genotype a depends on the relative magnitudes of
the two mutation rates. Notice that an equilibrium at q = 0 or q = 1 can occur only
if one (or both) of the mutation rates is zero. Because of this, mutation is said to

act to maintain the variability in the population.

A comparison of genetic and cultural transmission
The simple haploid model described above has several qualitative features in
common with most models in population genetics. Cultural transmission in humans
is characterized by some of the same features, and because of this the analogy
between genetic and cultural evolution is a fruitful one. In what follows we highlight these structural features of genetic transmission and indicate the nature of their
cultural analogs.

1. A stable structure is transmitted. The genotype of an individual is for the most
part determined by what it has inherited from its parents. Mutation can act to
change an individual’s genotype spontaneously, but the rate of change is very slow.
The evidence from social learning theory and from observed parent-offspring
correlations suggests that some cultural traits are similarly transmissible and reasonably stable.
2. Parents are a small subset of the population. Each offspring derives its genotype by “sampling” two individuals from the population, its mother and father.
Similarly, both the nature of human social learning and the statistical data from
psychometric studies indicate that humans sample only a small number of individuals (although very often more than two) during the acquisition of any particular
trait.
3. Different parents may have different roles in the transmission process. In the
simple genetic model presented above, the mother and the father have the same
probability of transmitting their genotype to an offspring. In other genetic models
(e.g. sex-linked traits) the two sexes can have different probabilities. The number
of different roles in cultural transmission can be substantially larger, with a variety

64

The Cultural Inheritance System

of classes of individuals other than genetic parents influencing the acquisition of
different traits.
4. The frequency of the a allele can be different in the two sexes. Again, in the
simple genetic model the frequency of the genotype, a, was the same in both sexes.
However, if the sexes occupy different ecological niches or if there is sexual
selection, these frequencies can be different. This will affect the probability that
different matings occur and, therefore, potentially lead to changes in the frequency
of different genotypes. Similarly, we expect in some cases the frequency of different cultural variants among different kinds of cultural parents to be different.
The model of the cultural transmission of a dichotomous trait
With these analogies in mind, let us now build our first model of cultural transmission. Many cultural characters can reasonably be modeled as though there
existed only a finite number of distinct variants. The simplest such characters would
have only two alternative variants. This will be particularly true of “presenceabsence” traits like smoker/nonsmoker or likes-cucumbers/dislikes-cucumbers. We
will refer to such traits as “dichotomous cultural traits.” Many traits may be better
modeled as having several, or even a continuum of, variants. We will consider the

latter case at the end of this chapter.
To model the transmission of a dichotomous cultural trait we begin by labeling
the variants, say c and d. For example, c might represent
the variant “likes-cucumbers” and d the variant “dislikes-cucumbers.” The state of the population is determined by the distribution of different cultural variants. Since there are only two
variants in this example, the state of the population can be specified by the frequency of individuals with the variant c, labeled p. In analogy with the genetic
model sketched above, the task is to find a recursion that allows us to predict the
frequency of p in the next generation given its frequency in the present generation.
Again, let us break down the life cycle of an individual into discrete stages during
which only one process changes the frequency of the two cultural variants.
At first, we

restrict attention to vertical and oblique transmission,

that is,

transmission from members of one generation to naive members of the next
generation. For the time being we suppose that each naive individual is enculturated
by exactly three models, numbered 1,2,3, who occupy the same set of cultural roles.
Later in this chapter we shall see that it is very easy to generalize this model to more
than three models and to the case of horizontal transmission; in Chapter 5 we will
show that it is easy to generalize to the case where the number of cultural parents
and the nature of their social roles vary from one naive individual to another.
The cultural transmission rule gives the probability that a particular naive individual acquires the cultural variant c (or d) given that it is exposed to cultural

parents with each different combination of cultural variants. There are a very large
variety of conceivable cultural transmission rules. Here we consider a very simple
“linear” transmission rule that is very similar to the haploid genetic model outlined
above. Table 3.6 gives the transmission rule when there are three cultural models.
The transmission process is characterized by the values of the parameters A,, A>,
and A3. These values must sum to one because the probability that a naive individ-

Models of Cultural Transmission

65

Table 3.6 A linear transmission rule for three parents
Cultural Variant
Characterizing Model
1

2:

Probability That Naive Individual Acquires
Cultural Variant

3

c

d

Cc

@

c

1

0

Cc

Cc

d

Ai ot Ao

A3

Cc

d

Cc

Ai

d

Cc

Cc

A> =F A3

Ao
A

d

d

Cc

A3

Ay ate Ao

d

Cc

d

A>

Ay aia A3

c
d

d
d

d
d

Ay
0

A2 + Az

Te A3

ual acquires some variant of the trait must be one. A large value of A; means that
the naive individual is disproportionately likely to acquire the cultural variant of the
ith model. Thus these parameters can be interpreted as the importances or weights
of models in different social roles in the transmission process. Notice that if all three
models have the same cultural variant, the offspring acquires that variant with
certainty. (For an extremely thorough analysis of a similar model for the case of
two cultural parents, see Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,

1981: Chap. 2.)

We want to use the cultural transmission rule to predict the frequency of c after
transmission, p’. To do this we need to specify the probability that each distinct set
of cultural parents is formed. Suppose that we label the probability of forming a set
of models with ccd as Prob(ccd) and so on. Then, the rules of conditional probabilities result in the following expression for p’:
p’ = (1)Prob(ccc)
+ (A; + A,)Prob(ccd)

+ (A; + A3)Prob(cdce)

+ (A, + A;3)Prob(dcc)

+ (A,)Prob(cdd) + (A;)Prob(ded) + (A;)Prob(ddc)

(3.9)

Equation 3.9 says that the probability that a randomly chosen individual in the
population of naive individuals is c is equal to the product of probability that a
particular cultural “mating” results in c [e.g. A,] and the probability that that mating
occurs [e.g. Prob(cdd)], summed over all possible matings.

To evaluate Equation 3.9 we must specify the probability distribution of sets of
models. First, let us assume that cultural parents are chosen randomly from the
population before mating. This means that the probability of each set of cultural
parents with I (I = 0,. . .,3) models with variant c and 3 — I models with variant

d is p(1 — p)*~'. Thus Equation 3.9 becomes

42) er
pd — pinay
papi
+ M1 — p) (Ajet Ao + Az) + (L

Using the fact that A;

+ A3) + (Ay + A3)]
p)*(0)

(3.10)

+ A, + A3 = 1, we can simplify this expression to

p= pa 2p

py

pl =p)

(3.11)

66

The Cultural Inheritance System

or

ap ayo

(3.12)

In this simple three-model case with random formation of sets of models and a
linear transmission rule, the cultural transmission rule causes no change in the

frequency of cultural traits.
A more complex model

It turns out that this result is fairly general. To see this, let us consider the case of
n models and nonrandom formation of sets of models. Because using a table to
specify the transmission rule becomes inconvenient as the number of models
increases, we often define transmission rules algebraically. To do this, we assign
a numerical value to each cultural variant. In this case, assign the value 1 to the
cultural variant c and the value 0 to the cultural variant d. Let X; be the numerical

value of the cultural variant of the ith model, in a particular set of cultural parents.
Further, let A; be the importance of the ith parent in transmission. Then in the case
of n models the probability that a naive individual acquires the cultural variant c
given that the n cultural parents have traits that take on the particular set of values
DeGiixe chcd 0. & is

Prob(offspring = c|X,,. . .,X,)

= S AX

(3.13)

Once again the Aj must sum to one. Equation 3.13 illustrates the economy of
expression that we can achieve using an algebraic representation of the transmission
rule.
To predict the frequency of c after transmission, p’, we weight the probability
that the naive individual acquires variant c given that he or she is exposed to a given
set of models (X;,. . .,X,) by the probability that that set of models is formed,
Prob(X,,. . .,X,), and then sum over all sets of models. This leads to the following

expression:

p =>
X]

1

1

>
=0

Ky

Prob(exiikxgy

Prob Ot

ee

al)

0

To evaluate Equation 3.14 we must specify the probability distribution of sets

of models. Define M(X,,. . .,X,) as the joint probability distribution of X,,. . .,X,.
Further, let M,(X;) be the probability that the ith model has the cultural variant, X;,

averaged over all sets of cultural parents. Mj(X;) is said to be the marginal probability distribution of X;. Suppose that the joint distribution of (X,,. . -»Xn) is such
that each of the marginal distributions has the following property:

Mi(1) = p,
M,(0)'="1= p

(3.15)

Models of Cultural Transmission

67

This says that the frequency of c in each of the model roles is the same as the
frequency of c in the population as a whole. The assumption that cultural parents
are drawn at random from the population as a whole (a sort of cultural random
mating) satisfies this condition, but so do a variety of other schemes, for example,
ones in which models with similar behaviors are more likely to be found in the same
set of cultural parents. When sets of cultural parents are formed in accordance with
Equation 3.15, we shall say they are formed “nonselectively.” It is shown in Box
3.1 that when the formation of sets of models is nonselective and the transmission
tule is linear, transmission leaves the frequency of different cultural variants in the
population unchanged.
This is an important result because it defines the conditions under which the
transmission process itself does not result in evolutionary forces. We shall see that
if the transmission rule is nonlinear or the formation of sets of cultural parents is
selective, then cultural transmission does introduce evolutionary forces. We will
defer analysis of these more interesting but more difficult cases until later chapters.
Random

variation

Various events during the rest of the life history of an individual will lead to
evolutionary forces that affect the distribution of cultural variants in the population.
The simplest force is due to random variation, the cultural analog of mutation. By
“random variation” we mean unpredictable changes in the cultural variant of an
individual. There are three plausible sources of random variation: (1) the naive

individual may erroneously perceive or erroneously cognize the behavior of an
enculturating individual, (2) even if an individual accurately acquires a cultural
Box 3.1 The generalization of Equation 3.10 to the case of n cultural parents is
Ue

1

1

S

eens >

x,=0

Xp=O0

n

(S As) MOxis «<5

(1)

\i=0

Froin the laws of conditional probability

(1Fe Coste ns 09 ae

NE Ge) een) b.eipeaeae

e e CUP.)

(2)

where Prob (x;, . . . , Xn|Xi) is the conditional probability of (x1, .. . , Xi-1, Xi+1,
. , Xn) given x;. Combining (1) and (2) and rearranging the order of summation
results in

rae 5 a(S Mon) (> te ShProb(xi, . . . xl)
xj=0

x1=0

or

p’ = > Ai(()p + (O)(1 — p))
P

,

=P

Xn=

68

The Cultural Inheritance System

(3) a correctly
rule, it may be forgotten or misremembered at a later time, and
performed in a
learned and remembered rule may be incompletely or erroneously
though the
given instance when it is being used as a model by another. Even
are quite
proximate mechanisms of random cultural variation and genetic mutation
different, their properties are analogous.
We will model the effect of random variation exactly like mutation in the haploid
genetic model. Suppose that the probability that an individual erroneously learns,
“error
misremembers, or transmits cultural variant c as d is p. and that the similar

rate” for d to c is py. Then the frequency of the cultural variant c after random
cultural variation, p”, is
Dp: =

p’

ae Die

je (1 aye p’)Pa

(3.16)

We assume that cultural transmission is linear and that the formation of cultural
models is nonselective. These assumptions result in the following recursion for p:

D =P — ple + U = Dia

iy)

We can calculate the equilibrium frequency of the cultural variant c, p, exactly as
we did in the haploid genetic case. This leads to the following expression for p:
a

Ma
ba

a

He

sada

This expression is completely analogous to the haploid genetic model described
above. This results from the fact that the linear transmission rule has essentially the
same properties as Mendelian genetic transmission. For another treatment of a
closely related model, see Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981: Chap. 2). As we

proceed with our discussion, we will show step by step how various features that
seem to characterize cultural transmission cause deviations from this linear model.

Horizontal transmission

It is very easy to modify the model of vertical and oblique transmission of a
dichotomous character introduced in the last section to represent horizontal transmission. Consider a population of individuals of more or less comparable ages at
a particular time, t. Suppose an interval of time At passes, and during this interval
of time each individual encounters exactly n — | other individuals. We call these
individuals “models” and label them 2,. . .,n, not necessarily in the order in which
they were encountered. (We will show how this analysis can be generalized to
allow individuals to encounter different numbers of models in Chap. 5.) Then at
time t + At, each individual either retains his preexisting cultural variant with
probability A, or adopts the cultural variant of the ith individual encountered with
probability Aj. Then, the probability that an individual is characterized by variant
c given that it had trait value X, at time t, and encountered individuals that had trait

Models of Cultural Transmission

69

values X2,. . .,X,, is equal to

Prob(Individual 1 = c at t+ At|Xj,. . .,X,) =

>) AX

(3.19)

i=1

Equation 3.19 has exactly the same form as Equation 3.10, which describes
vertical and oblique transmission. The only difference is conceptual: to model
horizontal transmission we allow an individual to be one of its own cultural parents,
along with the n — 1 models. This allows us, for example, to model a situation in

which individuals are unlikely to change their cultural variant by making an
individual’s own weight, A,, approach one.
To compute the effect of horizontal transmission on the frequency of the variant
c in the population, we need to specify the probability that individuals with variants
are encountered. Let M(X,,. . .,X,) be the probability that an individual with trait
value X, encounters models with trait values X,,...,X,. Then as long as
M(X,,. . .,X,) represents nonselective formation of cultural parents as defined

above, the episode of horizontal transmission leaves the frequency of the two
variants in the population unchanged.
This is a very useful result, for it means that we can use the same mathematical
machinery to model vertical, oblique, and horizontal cultural transmission. Results
derived for one mode can be easily generalized to the others. We only need to keep
in mind that the time scale has changed. In horizontal transmission the “generation
time” is the length of time, At, in which individuals typically have some chance of
changing their cultural variant.

Cultural drift
So far we have assumed that populations are very large. If populations are small,
then sampling error will cause the frequency of the cultural variants to vary randomly. Consider a population of N individuals in which there are two cultural
variants, c and d, with frequencies p and 1 — p. When cultural transmission is
linear, the individuals who make up the next generation can be thought of as a
random sample of size N of the previous generation. Thus the frequency of c after
transmission, p’, is a random variable with mean p and variance (1/N)p(1 — p).
This means that if we started out with a large number of such populations, in some
of them p’ would be larger than p, and in others it would be smaller, but the average
p’ of all the populations would equal p. This process we will call “cultural drift”
(because it is closely analogous to genetic drift).
In this book, we largely ignore the effects of cultural drift and concentrate
instead on deterministic models. Deterministic models are easier both to analyze
and to understand, particularly for the mathematically less sophisticated. It is our
intuition that given the present state of development of the theory of cultural
transmission, deterministic models return more insight per unit of effort invested
in model building (or model reading) than do stochastic models. Both CavalliSforza and Feldman

(1973a,

1981) and Lumsden

and Wilson

(1981) provide

extensive analyses of models of cultural transmission which include the effects of
drift.

70

The Cultural Inheritance System

A model of the cultural transmission of a quantitative character
It is more natural to model many culturally transmitted characters as having a
continuous range of values, instead of just two as we assumed above. For example,
rather than characterizing an individual as either a Republican or a Democrat, we
commonly place individuals on a political continuum running from right to left. It
is probably even better to characterize an individual in terms of his or her position
on a variety of different dimensions each of which represents his or her attitudes
toward a particular issue. In this way it is possible to represent even quite complex
sets of beliefs.
In modeling the cultural transmission of a quantitative character, we make the

same general assumptions that we made in modeling the evolution of a dichotomous
character, but add one major complication. In the case of quantitative characters we
explicitly distinguish between the cultural variants, defined in terms of inherited
information, and the directly observable behavioral differences that result from
different cultural variants. This distinction is analogous to the distinction between
genotype and phenotype in quantitative genetic models.
Imagine that the cultural variant individuals acquire through social learning can
be characterized by a single number, X, which might, for example, denote their

position on the left to right political spectrum. Further, suppose that an individual’s
behavior at any particular time can also be specified by a single number, Y, which
might represent the individual’s public statements on a particular issue.
We assume that different individuals with the same cultural variant (i.e. the same
value of X) will in general be characterized by different behaviors (i.e. different
values of Y). These differences could be the result of simple errors; for example,

an individual may advocate a particular political position because he or she misunderstands the issues involved. Or the same cultural variant may result in different
behaviors because it is expressed in a different environment. Two equally radical
university professors may express different opinions on property taxes if one of
them owns

a house.

We

will also assume,

however,

that the individuals with

different cultural variants will on average behave differently. The opinion of radical
professors about property taxes will on average be different from that of conservative ones. These assumptions are shown graphically in Figure 3.1.
The population is characterized by the distribution of cultural variants. For a
character which varies continuously, this distribution is a probability density funcDISTRIBUTION OF POLITICAL
BEHAVIORS OF INDIVIDUALS
WITH ATTITUDE X,

DISTRIBUTION OF POLITICAL
BEHAVIORS OF INDIVIDUALS
WITH ATTITUDE X,

||
-

|

LEFT

~X5
POLITICAL

RIGHT

ATTITUDE

Fig. 3.1 The horizontal axis gives a hypothetical cultural trait that affects
political attitude
measured on a left to right scale. The two curves plot the distribution
of actual behaviors
that might result from two particular cultural variants, X, and Xp.

Models of Cultural Transmission

71

tion which we will label P(X). This function has the following interpretation.
Suppose that dX is a small increment in X. Then the probability that a randomly
chosen member of the population has a cultural variant between X and X + dX is
approximately P(X)dX. Suppose that we could measure the cultural variants of
different individuals. Then we could get an approximation to the P(X) by measuring
a large number of individuals and assigning them to classes of X as shown in Figure
3.2. The histogram that results is an approximation to P(X).

z
Fs

OO

Zit
w

55
Oz
«xO
Lio:

X X+dX

CULTURAL
VARIANT
Fig. 3.2 The distribution of a hypothetical quantitative cultural trait in a population. The
height of the histogram between X and X + dX is proportional to the fraction of the
population with cultural variants that fall in that range.

Clearly the shape of P(X) will depend, in part, on the scale of measurement used.
Experience from quantitative genetics and from psychometric studies suggests that
it will often be possible to choose the scale of measurement so that P(X) can be

approximated by a normal probability density. When this is true, it is possible to
characterize the population by the mean value of X, X, and the variance of X in
the population, V. This greatly simplifies the task of modeling the evolution of the
population because it means we only have to keep track of two numbers, X and V.
Blending inheritance
We will begin by describing a simple blending model of the cultural transmission
of a quantitative character. As before, we suppose that each naive individual is
enculturated by n models, numbered 1,. . .,.n. Suppose that the cultural variant of
the ith model is X;. The offspring observes the behavior of each model, perhaps in
a variety of environmental contexts, and then induces an estimate of the cultural

rule that the model used to generate the observed behavior. We will label the naive
individual’s estimate of the ith model’s cultural rule Z,;, which we will assume is

given by
Zi =

Xj ne;

(3.20)

where the e; are random variables with a multivariate normal distribution,
N(e,. . .,€n), which represent the fact that a naive individual’s estimate of the

model’s cultural rule may diverge from the inherited cultural rule of the model
because of (1) environmental effects on the model’s phenotype, (2) random variation of particular model performances, or (3) estimation errors by the naive

72

The Cultural Inheritance System

equal
individual. We assume that each e; has a mean equal to zero and a variance
common
a
in
behavior
their
model
may
parents
cultural
to E;. Because different
environment, we also allow for the possibility that e; and e; may be correlated by
assuming that the Cov(e;,e;) = Ej.

One way to conceptualize cultural transmission is to imagine that the naive
individuals are trying to estimate what behaviors have been favored by selection in
previous generations using observations of a finite sample of the population, its
models. Given this view, one plausible cultural transmission rule would be for naive
individuals to adopt the average phenotype of its models. This leads to what has

been called a “blending model” of inheritance (e.g. Fisher, 1958). Let Xo be the

cultural variant of a particular naive individual. Then a blending transmission rule
is given by the following equation:

X=

¥ AZ,

(3.21)

a

where A; is (in analogy with the dichotomous model) a constant giving the weight
of the ith model in the transmission process.
As in the dichotomous case, we want to calculate the distribution of cultural

variants in the population after cultural transmission, denoted P’(X), given the
distribution before transmission. Because we are assuming that P(X) is normal, we

need only to deduce the effect of transmission on the mean and the variance of
P(X). Let M(X),. . .,Xn) be the probability that the set of cultural parents is
characterized by the particular combination of cultural variants (X;,. . .X,). Then

the mean value of X in the population after transmission, X’, is

xX'= ||M(Xi,. . ..X,)N(e1,. - ses) S A(X; + &) dX). . .dX,dey. . .de,
i=1

(3.22)

This equation weights the average cultural variant that results from a given set of
cultural parents, 2/'_ ,AiX;, by the probability that such a set of parents is formed,
M(X,,. . .,Xn), averaged over all possible sets of cultural parents. This equation is

a modification of Equation 3.14 which allows for a continuum of cultural variants.
Once again we will assume that the formation of sets of models is nonselective.
This means that the marginal distribution of cultural variants among models who
occupy the ith social role, Mj(X;), is equal to P(X;). With this assumption it can be
shown that (see Box 3.2)

xox

(3.23)

The linear blending rule leaves the population mean of a quantitative cultural
variant unchanged.
We can compute the variance after transmission, V’, in a similar way. It can be
shown (see Box 3.2) that this results in the following expression for the variance
after cultural transmission:
Vi=

S A/V
i=l

+ BE)

+ 2
i>j

A;A(E; + V Corr(X;,Xj))

(3.24)

Models of Cultural Transmission

Box 3.2 Equation 3.22 can be divided into a sum of two terms:

ees iat |DEMUpee
i=1

So Nier aon eA. dx, 1 rdk.der, 0 des

n

ct >

M(X,,

Sait

cH

X,)N(e1,

Bs

Whe

en) Aie; dx,

5

en

dX,de,

oars

de,

i=1

When we integrate over the estimation errors, e;, the second term goes to zero and
the
first term no longer depends on e;. Next, let Prob (X:,. . . , Xn |X;) be the conditional
probability density of (Xi Jaws Xi eXua Sf, X,) given X;, and M;(X;) be
the
marginal density of X;. Then using the laws of conditional probability (see Box 3.1)
this equation can be rewritten as

B= [real Dy ProbKijai, X.|XYMQAKIAXY

.. dX,

i=1

Next, we exchange the operations of summation and integration:

es: | -. + |Prob(X, SAPO MAb Cpe c ea est

eae,

i=l

dX, Mi(Xi)AiXi dXi
The conditional probability density must integrate to one. Thus

TONY

M(Xi)X; dX; = X

i=1

The variance of X in the population after transmission, V’, is

vee i snag |MUI
bea

ed Cr

OXON

Em. e9(3 A(X; + e)) aX

Se

After squaring the sum this becomes
Vi

=> | 2

ee [ Ne.

tics

ese

e,)M(X),

6. sie) wreig) xa

SA?(X?

at 2 Xie; ar ef)

i=1
+2

>

A; Ai(XiX;

+

Xie; AF Xjei ae =) dx,

ee

dX,de,

5a

0 de,

ay X?

i>j

Since the e; and the X; are assumed to be independent and the means of the e; are zero,
all terms linear in e; are zero. The remaining expression can be simplified to 3.24 in
the text using the rules of conditional probability as in the case of the mean.

The term Corr(X;,X;) is the correlation of X; and X;. If sets of cultural models are
formed at random, the Corr(X;,X;) = 0. The data from psychometric studies indicate, however, that sets of models assort in such a way that similar individuals are

in the same sets of cultural models.
Corr(X;,X;) > 0.

If models

i and j assort in this way,

73

74

The Cultural Inheritance System

The most important thing to notice about Equation 3.24 is that the variance after
transmission does not necessarily equal the variance before transmission. Blending
inheritance, even with a linear transmission rule, affects the distribution of cultural
variants in the population. To get a better idea of how this happens, we will first
econsider a very special case. Assume that mating occurs at random so that
Corr(X;,X;) = 0 for each pair of models. Next suppose that Aj = Aj = (1/n), so

that all models have equal weight, and finally assume that E;, = E; = 0, so that
there is no error in the transmission process. In this case

This equation says that in this special case the transmission process decreases the
variance of X in the population by a factor of 1/n. This makes sense because the
naive individual is averaging the phenotypes of a sample of n models, and experience with statistics tells us that increasing the sample size decreases the variance
of the mean. Thus the simplest blending rule has the property that heritable variation rapidly disappears.
Now, suppose we return the complications one at a time to Equation 3.24. First,
suppose that the parents have different weights in the transmission process. Then

V' =V> A?

(3.26)

i=1

Notice that Equation 3.26 is the same as Equation 3.25 except that (1/n) is replaced
by 2A?. When cultural parents have unequal weights in transmission this has the
effect of reducing the “effective number” of cultural parents. (To see this, think
about what should happen if A; = 0 for a particular model.)
Next we suppose that the formation of sets of cultural parents is assortative, so
that Corr(X;,X;) = R (where R is a constant) for each pair of models. Then

Vv’ = V[((1/n) + (1 — 1/n)R]

Caza)

Thus, if similar individuals are more likely to be found together in a set of models
than chance alone would dictate, the effect of blending inheritance on the variance

is reduced. Again this is easy to understand in terms of the extreme case R = 1.
This means that the cultural variants of different models are perfectly correlated
and, therefore, there is in effect only one model. In this case it seems reasonable

that there should be no blending effect.
Next, we allow errors by naive individuals in estimating the cultural rules of their
parents. This means that E; > 0, fori = 1,. . .,.n. We will continue to assume that
E; = 0. In this case

V' =(1/n)V +E

(3.28)

where E = (1/n)SE, is the average value of Ej for the set of models. This equation
Says that the errors made in estimating the models’ cultural variants increase the
variance of the distribution of cultural variants each generation by an amount E.

Models of Cultural Transmission

75

Blending inheritance and the conservation of variation

In each of the cases described in the previous section the blending transmission rule
reduced the amount of variation in the population. The strength of this effect
depends on the effective number of models, the extent to which the formation of
sets of models is assortative, and the amount of new variation introduced each

generation by errors. Despite these qualifications it seems hard to dispute that
blending inheritance creates a powerful evolutionary force reducing the variance of
quantitative characters.
Geneticists often claim that their main contribution to Darwinian theory was the
discovery that genes are particulate units because, unlike blending inheritance,
particulate inheritance conserves variation. During the nineteenth century most
biologists thought that organic inheritance was also a blending process, and Darwin
adopted this view in The Origin of Species. A Scottish engineer named Fleeming
Jenkin (1864) pointed out the effect of blending inheritance on the variance, and

argued that it would rapidly destroy the variation necessary for natural selection to
work. Darwin’s correspondence reveals that he thought that Jenkin’s argument was
a serious blow to his theory (Eiseley, 1958). It was not until R. A. Fisher (1918)

showed how particulate inheritance could be reconciled with quantitative phenotypic variation that Darwin’s ideas were completely immune to this argument.
Several people have raised a similar objection to us in the case of culture. The
hypothesis that culture is subject to evolutionary forces, like natural selection or
biased transmission, depends on the assumption that cultural transmission preserves
variation. Therefore, they argue, cultural transmission must be particulate. We
believe that this argument, as hoary as it is, is a non sequitur. It is certainly true
that variation must be preserved for evolutionary mechanisms based on selection
and biased transmission to work, and that particulate inheritance is one such
mechanism that will serve that function. However, it does not follow that it is the

only such mechanism or that particulate inheritance by itself guarantees the conservation of variation.
In the absence of selection and mutation, the particulate nature of genetic
inheritance does ensure that the variance of a quantitative character in a population
will achieve a stable positive equilibrium value (Fisher, 1958). In the absence of
mutation, however, most forms of selection will rapidly deplete this variation. Only
recently have attempts been made to show (Kimura, 1965; Lande, 1976) how
particulate inheritance, in combination with measured mutation rates, can account

for the observed variation in quantitative characters. These authors argue that the
main effect of particulate inheritance is to allow very small mutation rates to
maintain observed amounts of variation (see Turelli, 1984, for a contrasting view).
Are there any circumstances under which blending inheritance can maintain
significant variation? To answer this question we calculate the equilibrium value
of V assuming that transmission creates the only forces affecting the variance. The
equilibrium value of the variance is found by setting V’ equal to V in Equation 3.24
and solving for V. This results in the following expression for the equilibrium variance, V:

ATE
+ 225 AASEj

We

=

SEA?

a2

Dis Ai A; Corr(X;,Xj)

(a22)

16

The Cultural Inheritance System

value of V is
As long as at least one of the E; is greater than zero, the equilibrium
is introduced
n
variatio
new
as
long
as
since
ng
surprisi
greater than zero. This is not
ing to get
interest
more
be
would
It
zero.
exactly
become
each generation V cannot
for all 1
that
assume
we
this
ish
accompl
To
V.
of
de
some feeling for the magnitu
= R.
X;)
Corr(Xj,
(4)
and
(1/n),
=
Aj
=
Ai
(3)
EC,
=
andj (1) E, = E, (2) Bj
and
parents
the
of
variants
cultural
the
between
ion
correlat
This means that R is the
these
With
parent.
each
for
errors
on
estimati
the
between
C is the correlation
simplifying assumptions the expression for the equilibrium variance becomes

V= EC Baie

DC)

.30

Ciel Oey R)

aoe,

This expression indicates that the equilibrium variance can be any value between
zero and infinity depending on the relative values of the four parameters, E, R, C,
and n. If E(1 + (n —

1 and/orR is close to one, V

1)C) is large compared ton —

will be large. Thus we can conclude that a substantial variance can be maintained
with blending inheritance if enough new variation is introduced into the population
each generation [i.e. E(1 + (n — 1)C) > nJ or if the formation of sets of cultural
parents is sufficiently assortative (i.e. R near 1).

Whether blending inheritance will maintain enough variation for selection and
other evolutionary forces to work is an empirical question. If the rate of introduction of new variation is low (as it is in the genetic case), then the answer is

probably no. If the cultural error rate is high, blending inheritance will present no
difficulties. In the absence of empirical estimates of the cultural error rate we cannot
exclude blending inheritance as a plausible model for the cultural inheritance of a
quantitative character.

An alternative to the blending model
It is often assumed, incorrectly, that blending models and particulate models are the
only possible alternatives. In fact, other models are conceivable. In this section we
outline a model of the cultural transmission of a quantitative character that does not
assume any kind of particles exist, but which nonetheless maintains variation in a
way that is exactly analogous to genetic transmission. We refer to this model as the
“multifactor model” for reasons that will become apparent as we go along. We
begin again with the simplest (and least realistic) case and then add features that
make the model more realistic.
We start with the same assumptions as in the blending case. Each offspring is
enculturated by n parents who are characterized by the cultural variants X,,. . ., Xp.
The offspring uses each model’s actual behavior to estimate his or her cultural
variant. These estimates are labeled Z),. . .,Z,. However,

we now

assume

the

following transmission rule, which is quite different from blending inheritance. We
imagine that the naive individual chooses one of the cultural parents as a “role
model” and adopts its estimate of that model’s cultural rule as its own cultural
variant. We can express this mathematically as follows:
Prob(Xo

=

Zi|Z1,.

: ws4

=

Aj

(3251)

Models of Cultural Transmission

77

where Xo is the naive individual’s cultural variant and A; is the probabil
ity that the
ith model is chosen as a role model. Thus the naive individual acquires
cultural
variant Xo = Z; with probability A;. The probability that the naive individu
al adopts
any cultural variant other than Z,,. . RL nSeZetOs

To compute the effect of this kind of cultural transmission on the mean
of the
population we proceed as before. Since on average the e; are zero, the mean
of the
cultural variants that result from a set of models with the cultural
variants
18
XT
BOG Xie

kis

SS A.X;
i=!

(3.32)

where E(X,|Xj,. . .,X,) is read “the expected value of Xo given the values
Xj,. . .,X,.” The mean value of Xp in the population after transmission is

X' = [. | HUG Xe e MUX Ce emEX,) CXS
where M(X,,.

We (3143)

. .,X,) is the probability density function governing the likelihood

that various sets of cultural parents are formed. Combining Equation 3.32 and
Equation 3.33 results in an expression for the mean that is identical to that of the
blending case. (See Eq. 3.22.) Thus, this model of cultural transmission leaves the

mean unchanged.
Next we compute the variance of X after transmission, V’. The expected value

of X§ given a particular set of models with cultural variants X,,. . .,X, is

ECK|Xgegutes Xo) i= [. | N(e1,. - 5€n) 5) A(X; + @))? dey. . de,

(3.34)

1

The variance in the whole population after transmission is

V'= I.: | Eee

EM Xie

XEON

e Xa =X

(335)

If the formation of cultural parents is nonselective, then combining Equations 3.35
and 3.34 shows that

If there is no additional variation introduced by the estimation process (i.e.

E; = 0 for all i), the variance is unchanged. The presence of any estimation errors
will cause the variance to increase, and if there are no other forces acting to oppose
this process the variance will grow without bound. It turns out that this model of
cultural transmission is formally identical to the one-locus haploid genetic model
with an infinite number of alleles and shares the property of this and other genetic
models that relatively low rates of introduction of new variation can maintain
substantial variation.

78

The Cultural Inheritance System

The multifactor model does not assume that inheritance is in any way particulate.
Just as in the blending model, each offspring makes an estimate of the cultural rule
that each of its cultural parents is using to generate offspring behavior. This estimate
is a continuously varying quantity. The only difference between this model and the
blending model is that in the multifactorial model the offspring ultimately acquires
the phenotype of only one of its cultural parents, although it “chooses” this role
model from a larger set, and different parents may be chosen as role models for
different traits. It is the quasi-uniparental aspect of the model that causes the
variance to be conserved.
The simple version of the multifactorial model outlined above is not a plausible
description of cultural transmission. To see why, consider several naive individuals
who share the same set of two cultural models. The model outlined above predicts
that the distribution of culturally acquired behavior among these “cultural sibs”
should be bimodal; some of the imitators like one model and others like the other

model. While this may be true for some characters, it seems more likely that in
general the distribution of imitator phenotypes will be unimodal and that the mode
will be intermediate between the parental types.
It is easy to modify the multifactorial model to meet this objection. To do this
we imagine that the phenotypic character or behavior of interest is the cumulative
result of a number of different components or factors. For example, consider the
way bread is made. The outcome, measured in terms of taste, depends on a variety
of factors, the kind of flour chosen, how much shortening and sweetener are added,
how long the bread is kneaded, how hot the oven is, and so on. Each different

combination of the factors will lead to a different kind of bread. Suppose that we
could characterize each kind of bread by a single number, Y. Then if we are free
to choose the measurement scales of each of the component factors that determine
the kind of bread, we might represent the aggregate effect of these factors in terms
of their sum. That is,

where Xj; is the value of the jth factor in the ith individual. So, for example, Xj;

might represent the amount of sweetener and X;. the amount of shortening that the
ith individual thought should go into making bread.
Now, suppose we generalize the simple transmission scheme discussed above to
multiple factors in the following way. Each naive individual is exposed to n cultural
parents. The naive individual estimates the value of each of the factors in each of

its model’s cultural rules. Let Z;, be the estimate of the jth factor for the ith model.

We suppose that

Ly

"Ay

Pe

(3.38)

where ej; are independent normal random variables with zero mean and variance E;;

that represent the effects of errors made in the estimation process.
Now Suppose that the naive individual constructs its own cultural rule by
“mixing and matching” from among the various factors of all its cultural parents.

Conclusion

79

For example, the individual adopts mother’s ideas about sweeteners, cooking time,
and temperature, grandmother’s ideas about shortening, and a neighbor’s ideas
about flour. This idea can be formulated mathematically by assuming that the

probability that the jth component of the imitator’s cultural tule, Xo;, will be Z;; with
probability Aj.
With these assumptions, the effect of transmission on the mean and variance of

each of the factors will be the same as in the simple one-factor model described
immediately above. The mean value of each factor will be unaffected by transmission, and the variance will be increased by an amount that depends on the
accuracy of the offspring’s estimations. It is also possible that the values of the
different factors may covary. However, as long as there are more than a few
cultural parents and the covariances of the estimation errors are small, any initial

covariance between the values of the factors will rapidly disappear. (We will return
to the topic of covariances in Chap. 8.)

If the formation of sets of cultural parents is nonselective, a derivation closely
analogous to the one given in Box 3.2 shows that Y’ = Y and that the variance of
Y, U is equal to

U

=

Let

>; AE;

(3.39)

Thus the effects of transmission on the variance are much the same as in the simpler
case in which there was only one factor.
The difference between the two models is that in the multifactorial model the
distribution of cultural offspring that result from a single set of cultural parents will
usually be unimodal, and the mode will be located between the cultural variants of

the two parents. This results from the fact that each element in the sum that makes
up the cultural rule of a particular offspring is a random variable with several
discrete outcomes, the estimates of factors in its parents. Sums of such random

variables are multinomially distributed, which has the requisite properties.
In subsequent chapters we will be concerned mainly with how the means of the
cultural variants in the population change in response to various forces of cultural
evolution, and we will be much less concerned with the variance. In most cases the

qualitative predictions of the theory do not depend on how the variance is maintained as long as it is maintained at a finite, stable level. In the absence of more
detailed information about the cultural transmission of quantitative characters, we
will simply assume that one of the mechanisms discussed above maintains a
constant, finite variance and concentrate on the mean.
Conclusion

In this chapter we have tried to convince the reader of two different things. First,
we argued that empirical work in the social sciences supports the notion that social
learning in the human species has the properties of an inheritance system. Individuals observe the behavior of others, induce the cultural rules that generated the
observed behavior, and then incorporate these rules into their own cultural reper-

toire. Second, we showed how this qualitative description of cultural transmission

80

The Cultural Inheritance System

could be translated, albeit in a stylized way, into mathematical models.

These

models, at least in principle, allow us to deduce the long-run, population-level
consequences of particular forms of cultural transmission.
One property of the simple models we have analyzed so far is that cultural
transmission by itself does not cause any change in the frequency of the different
behavioral variants. The models have that property because we assumed that naive
individuals unselectively acquire the cultural rules that are modeled for them.
Unselective copying must be represented with a linear model of transmission which
always has the property that cultural transmission itself leads to no evolutionary
forces.
It is interesting to consider this result in the context of the following commonly
held view. Many authors, including us, have argued that cultural transmission is
adaptive because it is an efficient shortcut to trial-and-error learning. By imitating
the cultural rules of others, individuals can avoid the cost of learning. Rosenthal and
Zimmerman (1978: 208) illustrate the argument with the following vivid metaphor:
Imagine being suddenly abandoned on a mythical island. One finds oneself
amid lurid vegetation, weird fauna, and surrounded by burbling streams and
geysers of many colors. What can one do? The intrepid but unwary castaway
might try direct experimentation to gain sustenance, hoping that experience will
be a successful teacher. . . . But hasty trials with unknown contingencies also
invite punishing, perhaps fatal effects of permanent time out. The more cautious adventurer could greatly improve prospects by. observing the exotic
animals . . . . If the area were populated, watching or asking the local inhabitants would be still more informative.

They conclude that “learning by observation minimizes the need for trial and error
practice.” This argument only makes sense if the individuals observed are behaving
adaptively: that is, if adaptive cultural variants are in higher frequency than maladaptive variants. As we have seen, however, if everyone acquires their behavior
unselectively, there will be no force that will act to increase the frequency of
adaptive traits—cultural transmission is a useful shortcut to ordinary trial-and-error
learning only if some force acts to increase the frequency of favorable cultural
variants. In the next chapters we consider several such forces.

4
Guided Variation and the
Evolution of Cultural
Inheritance
Custom is the principal magistrate of man’s life. [Its predominance] is everywhere visible. Men do just as they have done before; as if they were dead
images and engines moved only by the wheels of custom.
Francis Bacon

In 1573, at the age of twelve, Francis Bacon entered Cambridge University. A little
more than two years later he returned home disappointed and without his degree.
Bacon was little impressed with the scholasticism that dominated the university in
his day. He described his tutors as “Men of sharp wits, shut up in the cells of a few
authors, chiefly Aristotle, their Dictator” (quoted in Eiseley, 1973). Throughout the
rest of his scholarly life he was to stress the conflict he perceived between learning
and tradition. For Bacon, learning meant trial-and-error learning, gaining knowledge directly by observation or experiment. The alternative to learning was passive
acceptance of the cultural beliefs and traditions of the previous generation. For
Bacon, induction was important because it was an “engine” for overcoming the
stultifying effects of custom and tradition.
Bacon’s view of the relationship between learning and social tradition seems to
differ sharply from that of many contemporary sociobiologists (e.g. Alexander,
1979a; Bonner, 1980) who see social learning and individual trial-and-error learn-

ing as fundamentally similar. These scholars believe that all kinds of learning cause
individuals to acquire adaptive behavior by interacting with their environment.
Social learning is notable only because the “environment” includes the social
environment as well as the physical and biotic environment. From this point of
view, learning and custom are not opposed; instead, evolution should have shaped

the processes of ordinary learning and social learning (these authors argue) so that
they usually act in concert to enhance individual fitness.
These conflicting perceptions of the interaction between ordinary learning and
social learning present the following intriguing puzzle: Can a system of social
learning which inhibits individuals from learning new adaptive behaviors for themselves be favored by natural selection? The data reviewed in the previous chapter
and common experience suggest that Bacon was correct; adherence to culturally
inherited beliefs often causes people to ignore the dictates of ordinary, individual
learning. Generally, we expect that individual capacities for learning (and other
81

82

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

kinds of phenotypic plasticity) will have been shaped by evolution so that they
improve the fit of the organism to its environment. When culturally transmitted
tradition conflicts with learning, it is reasonable to surmise that the tradition is
maladaptive. It also seems likely, however, that the sociobiologists are correct in

assuming that the capacity for the cultural transmission of beliefs is adaptive.
In this chapter we suggest a possible solution to this puzzle. We proceed in three
steps. First, we briefly review the empirical evidence about the nature of individual
learning. Trial-and-error learning is but one of many mechanisms by which organisms modify their phenotype in response to environmental contingencies. In the
human case, at least, these mechanisms range in complexity from the simplest
kinds of conditioning to the complex processes of rational choice. For simplicity,
we refer to this whole range of processes as “individual learning.” On the basis of
our review, we propose a simple model of individual learning that captures the
qualitative properties of the range of learning processes.
Next, we will combine our model of individual learning with the simple models
of cultural transmission introduced in the previous chapter in an attempt to
understand how learning interacts with cultural transmission to affect the dynamics
of the distribution of phenotypes in a population. When individuals learn, phenotypic variation is not random. Instead, the frequency of certain (usually favorable)
variants is increased. If such learned variants are culturally transmitted, the result
is a force that increases the frequency from one generation to the next of the same
variants whose frequency is increased within a generation by learning. We call this
the force of “guided variation.” Early evolutionary theory placed great weight on
this force, often attributed somewhat erroneously to Lamarck. Darwin (e.g. 1874:
3) stressed its importance under the rubric of “the inherited effects of use and

disuse.” Although students of genetics have all but ruled out “Lamarckian” effects
in that system of inheritance, it is likely that they are important in the case of
culture.
With these results in hand, we then address the question, Are there any circumstances in which natural selection will cause cultural transmission to be more
important than learning in determining individual phenotype? The answer to this
question is particularly important for understanding the origins of cultural transmission. It seems likely that the capacity for culture evolved in a primate with
extensive learning abilities and prolonged parental care but only a rudimentary
ability for social learning. In such a species, the only forces increasing the frequency of favored variants would be natural selection and the force of guided
variation. We will conclude that under some environmental conditions (but not
others) cultural transmission can be favored.

These results are interesting in light of the curious fact that the cultural transmission of phenotype is apparently rare in nature, and where it does exist it is
generally restricted to a narrow range of traits (for reviews, see Immelman, 1975;
Galef, 1976; Bonner, 1980; Mainardi, 1980). Given the apparent benefits of cultural transmission in the human species, the rarity of culture seems paradoxical. Of
course, there are always many possible reasons a trait has not evolved. Nonetheless, it will be interesting to consider this problem in the context of the results

of this chapter.

Models of Learning

83

Models of Learning
In their book Programmed to Learn, Ronald Pulliam and Christopher Dunford
introduce a particularly apt metaphor to describe the relationship between genotype
and phenotype. Genes, they say, are like investors who are setting up a blind trust.
The investors can give their brokers a set of initial instructions, which cannot

subsequently be changed or canceled. Some investors might wish to give their
brokers detailed instructions about which stocks to buy and sell at each future time.
In an unpredictable environment like the stock market, such an investment strategy
is likely to be disastrous. Wiser investors would give their brokers a flexible set of
instructions. For example, they might specify that a certain proportion of the trust
be held in blue chip stocks, some in growth stocks, and so on, with the overall

specification that the broker try to maximize revenue within these constraints.
Similarly, in an uncertain world genes are more likely to be successful if phenotypes are free to adapt flexibly to the environment in which they find themselves.
It seems likely that virtually all organisms have mechanisms that allow learning
and other forms of phenotypic plasticity, general genetic “instructions” that permit
considerable flexibility in the way anatomy, physiology, and behavior are actually
adapted to particular environments. Reviews of the kinds and extent of learning in
nature can be found in Waddington (1957), Bradshaw (1965), Wilson (1975),
Bonner (1980), and Staddon (1983). Humans modify their behavior in response to

environmental changes through a variety of mechanisms. These mechanisms range
from the simple conditioned responses that are studied by behavioral psychologists
to the cognitively complex processes of rational choice studied by cognitive psychologists and economists.
To model the interaction of individual learning and cultural transmission we
clearly require a model (or models) of learning. We would like this model to be as
simple as possible and still capture the qualitative features of the full range of
processes that fall within our definition of learning. Surprisingly, evolutionary
theorists have largely ignored phenotypic adaptation and instead focused on the
way that populations adapt genetically to heterogeneous environments. Because of
this there are no standard models of learning within evolutionary biology. Therefore, in this section we will briefly review models of learning used in the social
sciences. We will focus on two very different models, the linear learning model
(Bush and Mosteller, 1955) used by behavioral psychologists to describe certain
kinds of trial-and-error learning and the Bayesian model of rational choice used by
economists, decision theorists, and cognitive psychologists (e.g. Hirshleifer and
Riley, 1979). We shall see that these two models are qualitatively very similar, and
because of this fact we can capture the important qualitative features of learning in
a single, simple model.

Learning from the point of view of behavioral psychology

Behavioral psychologists have studied learning extensively in both animals and
humans. The goal of this work has been to discover general laws that describe the
process of learning in all species. To do this psychologists have examined how

84

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

ns. In most
animals learn in extremely simplified controlled laboratory conditio
us” (such
“stimul
a
between
ion
cases the animal is presented with a novel associat
ent (an
punishm
or
pellet)
food
(a
as a light or a bell) and some form of reward
e
associat
to
learns
animal
the
how
out
electric shock). The experimenter tries to find
of
details
the
ing
controll
y
carefull
By
the stimulus with the reward or punishment.
r the
the setting in which the learning takes place, the experimenter hopes to discove
.
fundamental processes that underlie all learning
The following experiment by Garcia and his co-workers (Garcia and Keolling,
1966) illustrates the approach. A naive rat is placed in a chamber with a water bottle
which is rigged so that every time the rat’s tongue touches the spout, lights flash
and a raucous noise is made. In roughly every other trial the noise and lights are
followed a few seconds later by an electric shock to the rat’s feet. The rat is allowed
to remain in the chamber for a fixed period of time. The same process is then
repeated with each of several rats. After a relatively short time rats learn to avoid
drinking “bright-noisy water.” Usually, different rats learn at different rates. In the
typical experiment a large population of rats shows the kind of results shown in
Figure 4.1. The rate at which rats drink the “bright-noisy” water decreases according to a smooth, convex curve.

MINUTE
PER
LICKS
OF
NUMBER
AVERAGE
0

|

2

3

NUMBER

OF

TRIALS

4

Fig. 4.1 Learning curve for rats being conditioned to avoid bright-noisy water. (Redrawn
from Garcia and Keolling, 1966.)

The linear learning model. Behavioral psychologists have invented a variety of
mathematical models that describe learning in a simple experimental setting like the
one described above. Here we discuss one of the earliest of these models, the linear

learning model of Bush and Mosteller (1955). Although there are a variety of
competing models (reviewed in Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers, 1965), the linear
model captures the general properties of learning and its simplicity allows us to add
cultural effects easily.
The basic assumption of this model (and many others in this field) is that learning
can be modeled as a change in the probability that the rat chooses to drink the
bright-noisy water. For a particular rat, let P; be the probability that the rat drinks
the bright-noisy water during the ith trial. Then the probability that the rat drinks

Models of Learning

85

during the next (i + 1) trial is assumed to be

Bear

et era.)

(10)

The parameters a; are called the learning parameters and may vary between zero and
one, according to the outcome of the trial. The a; give the importance of previous
trials relative to the most recent one in determining behavior during the current trial.
If the a; are near one, a single trial has little effect on the rat’s behavior; it learns

slowly. If the a, are near zero, the rat’s behavior is almost completely determined
by the most recent outcome. The I; are parameters which also range between zero
and one and give the reinforcement value of the outcome of the ith trial. A plausible
set of values for the I’; might be

i

_ |0 if the shock is administered
1 if the shock is not administered

Every time the shock is administered after the rat drinks the bright-noisy water, the
probability that the rat will drink on the next trial decreases an amount (1 — a,)P;,

and every time the rat drinks without being shocked the probability that it will drink
on the next trial is decreased an amount (1 — a,)(1 — Pj). (See Box 4.1.) It can be

shown that this model, called the “two-operator linear model,” results in a negatively sloped, convex learning curve like that shown in Figure 4.1. (See Atkinson
et al. for solution techniques.)
This extremely simple model gives three important insights into the learning
process. First, in order to learn the rat must be able to evaluate different outcomes
that result from its behavior. In this case, it must “know” that shocks are to be

avoided. Second, the rat cannot learn without making some assumptions about the
nature of the environment. In this example it must “assume” that events that occur
close together in time (i.e. the drinking of bright-noisy water and the subsequent
shock) are likely to be causally associated. Third, the time path of the learning
process depends on the initial predispositions of the rat. In this experiment rats
initially had no aversion to bright-noisy water, and even after several trials some
rats had not learned to use the light and noise as cues to avoid the shock. According
to the linear learning model, if the rats had started with an aversion to bright-noisy
water, they could have avoided many costly learning trials.
Box 4.1 Suppose that a rat drinks bright-noisy water on trial i and receives a shock.
We want to calculate the decrease in the probability that the rat will drink on trial
i+ 1. From 4.1
Pi

=

a; P; aE (1 77 ai)0

=

aiP;

The decrease in the probability of drinking is
(ete dSeki

i
=

bn dg
Pi(1

—

aj)

86

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

Learning as adaptation

as a
These three properties of the learning rule make sense if we think of learning
then
and
ent
environm
its
about
mechanism by which the rat acquires information
to do this
uses that information to modify its phenotype adaptively. The ability
must be
rat
The
ent.
environm
requires a priori “knowledge” about the nature of the
usually
events
Painful
fitness.
able to “decide” what kinds of events can reduce its
ntal
coincide
be
may
on
reduce fitness, although in this particular case the associati
the
in
events
what
about
ons
rather than evolved. The rat must make assumpti
is
It
events.
painful
the
avoid
environment can be used as predictive cues to
are
noise
and
light
sudden
as
such
probably a good rule of thumb that disturbances
frequently associated with contemporaneous events that the rat wants to avoid. As
we shall see, however, this rule of thumb does not always work. Finally, the rat
must begin with some initial “assumptions” about the environment. In this case
water was assumed to be all right until proven otherwise.
Until the early 1970s most behavioral psychologists would have looked askance
at this kind of adaptive interpretation of laboratory learning experiments (e.g.
Skinner, 1966). However, the experiments of Garcia and others examining the
acquisition of food preferences provide very strong evidence that animals have
learning rules that make adaptive sense. (For reviews of this work, see Seligman
and Hager, 1972, and Barker, Best, and Domjan, 1977.) The experiment described
above was part of a larger experiment that was crucial in convincing psychologists
of this fact. The larger experiment had four separate treatments. In addition to
bright-noisy water, rats were also exposed to “tasty” water which had saccharin
added to it. After drinking the tasty water, the rats were shocked in the same way
as before; however, they were unable to learn to associate the taste cue with the

subsequent shock. In another pair of treatments, sickness was induced in rats after
they had drunk tasty water or bright-noisy water, either by exposing them to X-rays
or by injecting ‘them with a poison. The rats exposed to tasty water quickly
developed an aversion to it, while those that became sick after drinking bright-noisy
water did not develop any aversion.
The results of this experiment, summarized in Table 4.1, suggest that rats act as
if they have a prior belief that there is a causal relationship between novel tastes and
subsequent gastric distress but that there is no such prior association between taste
and external events like an electric shock. Similarly, rats “expect” auditory and
visual cues to be associated with external consequences like shocks but not with
internal ones like gastric distress. These assumptions about nature seem very
sensible given that rats are nocturnal, live in a wide variety of habitats, and are

opportunistic foragers utilizing many different kinds of foods (Barnett, 1975). It
Table 4.1 The relationship between cue and reinforcement in the experiments of
Garcia et al. (1966)

ji
Reinforcer

Cue

Shock

Sickness

Taste
Lights/noise

No response
Response

Response
No response

Models of Learning

87

seems likely that rats must frequently learn to avoid novel, toxic food substances
whose main distinguishing feature is that they lead to gastric distress.
This adaptive interpretation of Garcia’s results is strengthened by the fact that
other experiments show that different patterns occur in other species. For example,
Wilcoxon, Dragoin, and Kral (1971) gave rats and quail blue, salty water and then
induced illness. When both species were subsequently offered blue water and salty
water, the rats avoided the salty water while the quail avoided the blue water. This
makes sense given that birds are diurnal foragers that use visual “cues to avoid
noxious food items like certain brightly colored caterpillars in contrast to nocturnal
rats that must use taste cues.
There is evidence that this kind of simple food aversion learning does not involve
any complicated cognitive abilities (Kalat and Rozin, 1972) but instead represents
a kind of reflexive aversion. It seems likely that humans, rats, and many other
animals do engage in much more complicated learning. In the next section we
consider one model of complex learning, the Bayesian theory of rational choice.
The Bayesian model of rational choice
The Bayesian theory of rational choice was developed by mathematicians and
economists as a normative theory of human decision making in the presence of
uncertainty (see Savage, 1954). At the root of the theory are several axioms that
the authors of the theory believed captured the meaning of rationality. For example,
one of the axioms is that rational choice must be transitive. This means that if an
individual prefers A to B and prefers B to C he must, if he is rational, prefer A to
C. It turns out that it can be shown that these axioms of rational choice are satisfied
only if people follow certain rules of behavior. These rules constitute the Bayesian
theory of rational choice, sometimes called Bayesian decision theory. There are
two key concepts in Bayesian decision theory. The first of these is the notion of
“utility.” If individuals are rational, it can be shown that they must be able to assign
to each outcome of a particular decision (or, more generally, to each state of the
world) a single number that represents the desirability, or utility, of the outcome.
The second key concept of Bayesian decision theory is the notion of subjective
probabilities. Again, it can be shown that rational individuals must be able to
specify the probability of each of the outcomes of a particular decision. The rational
decision is said to be the decision which yields the highest expected utility. If an
individual fails at either of these tasks, then it is likely that his choices will violate
one of the axioms of rational behavior.

The problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist. To see how the Bayesian model
works, consider the following simple example which has been adapted from Hadley
(1967: 438). Suppose that a group of tropical horticulturalists has just moved into
a new area. Each family clears a plot and plants its crops. The head of a particular
family, a “Bayesian horticulturalist,” can estimate the probability distribution of
yields from his plot from his experience in other areas. His best guess is that the
long-run average yield in this particular location will be M and the variance of the
yield from year to year will be V. The Bayesian horticulturalist knows that there
is some chance that his plot will not supply enough food for his family. According

88

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

to the customs of his group, he can hedge against this eventuality by helping in his
neighbors’ fields, which entitles him to a portion of their harvest if his own is
insufficient. Each day of labor donated to his neighbors entitles him to h units of
yield, but only if his family does not have enough; otherwise his neighbor keeps
all the food from his own garden. If at the end of the season the amount of food
the Bayesian horticulturalist has access to is still less than the amount his family
needs, D, he must borrow food from the headman, who charges substantial interest

rates. The Bayesian horticulturalist figures that, on average, the borrowed food
costs him twice as much labor in the long run as working in his neighbors’ fields.
Being rational, the Bayesian horticulturalist seeks to feed his family with the least
amount of extra work.
To solve this problem, the Bayesian horticulturalist starts by writing down the
total amount of labor on his neighbor’s field and for the headman, ), as a function
of (1) the eventual yield of his field, z, (2) the amount of time he decides to invest

in helping his neighbors, h, and (3) his family’s need, D:

h
ae

if. Zt
yD
ifz+h<D

oa

The rational choice of the level of investment in helping his neighbors is the level
that maximizes his expected utility, which we have assumed is the same as minimizing the expected amount of his labor, E(A). This is computed as follows:

“0
D-h
E(A) = i hy i(2)dz- 2) (Dee

Cee,

(4.3)

where f(z) is the Bayesian horticulturalist’s subjective probability distribution for
the yield of his plot. It is shown in Box 4.2 that E(A) is minimized when the
following rule is satisfied:

Prob(z + h < D) = 1/2

(4.4)

The left-hand side of Equation 4.4 is the probability that his own harvest plus
the share he can get of his neighbor’s harvest is less than his family’s needs.
Equation 4.4 says that the Bayesian horticulturalist should invest in helping his
neighbors up to the point at which this probability is equal to the ratio of the cost
of investing in his neighbor’s field to the cost of borrowing after the harvest. Since
he believes that his yield, z, is distributed normally with mean M, the optimal value

of h, h’, is

oe

D="M
0

if D—>M'>0
if DeeM =O

Gis)

The rational decision is to invest just enough in helping his neighbor
so that the
average yield of his own garden plus what he can get from his neighbor
is equal
to his needs. Notice that this rule depends on the ratio of the cost of
helping his

Models of Learning

89

Box 4.2 Since f(z) is a probability density, f f(z) = 1. Using this fact, we can
simplify Equation 4.3 as follows:

E(\) = h:+ 2(D — h) iSie

|One

We want to find the value of h, labeled h*, that minimizes E(A). This will occur when
d

one

=0

d

or

one) <0

and h* = 0

To calculate the derivative of E(\) we use the fundamental theorem of calculus which
states:
d

Giz)

d
= ie F(z)dz = F(G(2)
)
—G@)

a

ey: [Petey =D
D-h

=1—2 [

HD

hye 2(D — h)f(D — h)

f(z)dz

0

= 1 — 2 Prob(z < D — h)
Suppose that a particular value of h, h’, satisfies this condition. Then, if h’ > 0,
h’ = h*. Otherwise, h* = 0.

neighbor to the cost of borrowing after the harvest. If this ratio were different from
one-half, then the optimal decision would depend on the variance of his yield as
well as the mean.
A Bayesian view of learning. In the context of Bayesian decision theory, learning
is thought of as using observations to modify one’s prior probability distribution of
the outcomes that result from different decisions. We will illustrate how this works
in the context of the decision problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist. In particular,
we will show how he could use his experience to revise his estimate of the average
yield of his plot. The Bayesian horticulturalist knows that his estimate of the
long-run average yield, M, may be in error; the actual long-run average yield may
be another value. In fact (because he is a Bayesian) he can specify the density,
f(M,), that specifies the probability that the actual long-run yield will take on a
different value. As shown in Figure 4.2, we assume that f(M,) is initially normal

with mean M and variance V,,. After his first year’s harvest our horticulturalist
measures the yield from his garden and the result is a yield of y. If he assumes that
his actual long-run mean is M, and his estimate of the year-to-year variance is
correct, the density function specifying the probability that this yield takes different
values is proportional to

f(y|M.) « exp[—(y — M,)°/2V]

(4.6)

90

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

LONG
YIELD
RUN

f(Ma)
SUBJECTIVE
DESCRIBING
DENSITY
LONG

RUN

YIELD

Mg

Fig. 4.2 Shape of the assumed subjective probability density function of the Bayesian
horticulturalist that describes his beliefs about the long run yield of his plot, M.. M is the
mean and V,, the variance.

The Bayesian horticulturalist uses this information to revise his estimate of the
probability distribution of M, by calculating the conditional probability density of
M, given y using Bayes’s theorem:

f(y|M,) f(M,)

f(MIY) = FyIMy fv dM.

(4.7)

The mean of f(M,|y), M’, is his new estimate of the long-run mean. As is shown

in Box 4.3, f(M.ly) is normal with the following mean and variance:

Vin

al Ve
(4.8)

M'=aM+(l—a)y
where

u

Sia

V

VE

These equations say that the year’s experience has two effects on the Bayesian
horticulturalist’s estimate of the average yield. First, notice that the variable a is
always between zero and one, and therefore the variance of his estimate is always
decreased by a fraction a. Second, his estimate of the mean is moved toward ya
fraction a of the distance between his initial estimate, M, and the measured yield,
y. Notice that a will be near one if V > V,,. This means that if the annual variation
is much larger than the variance of the Bayesian horticulturalist’s estimate of the
mean, a will be nearly one, and one year’s experience will have little effect on the

horticulturalist’s beliefs. If, on the other hand, V,, > V, the yield from
a single year

Models of Learning

91

Box 4.3 First, note that Equation 4.7 can be rewritten as

f(Ma|y) = C exp{—(y — M,)?/2V} exp{—(M, — M)?/2V,,}
that is, as a constant, C, which is chosen so that the integral of f(Ma|y) is one,
multiplied by the product of two Gaussian functions of Ma. Expressions with the form

of Equation 4.7 will occur repeatedly in this book. This expression can be rewritten
as

f(M.|y) = C exp{—(y — M,)*/2V — (M — M,)2/2Va}
The quadratic expression in the exponent of this expression can be rewritten as the
sum of a perfect square in M, and a term not involving M, using the method of
completing the square, i.e.,

(y — M,)’/2V + (M — M,)?/2Vin = (Ma — M’)?/2V’ + (y — M)?/2(V + Va)

(1)

where

M

, = ¥Va + MV

Wavy:

q

oe

sg

VinV

Tea

The reader can verify that this identity is true by squaring out both sides and checking
for equality. Because the second term on the right-hand side of (1) doesn’t involve
M, it can be incorporated into the constant term. Thus

f(M.|y) = C exp{—(M, — M’)?/2V’}.
We have specified that C should be chosen so that the integral of f(M,| y) is one. This
means that it is a normal probability density with mean M’ and variance V’.

will have a substantial effect on the horticulturalist’s estimate of the long-run mean
and will also sharply reduce the variance of that estimate.
During the next year the Bayesian horticulturalist will use his revised estimate
of the long-run average yield of his plot to decide how much labor to invest in
helping his neighbor. Because his estimate of the yield of his garden is different
from his estimate the previous year, his behavior will also be different. The Bayesian horticulturalist can once again use the actual yield of his plot to update his
estimate of the long-run average yield of his plot. Each year the Bayesian horticulturalist will improve his estimate of the yield of his plot, and so each year the
change in his behavior will diminish. Thus, the average behavior of a number of
Bayesian horticulturalists will show a learning curve like that pictured in
Figure 4.3.
The problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist illustrates that behavior governed
by rational choice has the same three essential features as the much simpler models
of learning used by behavioral psychologists. First, the Bayesian model of rational

choice requires that the actor be able to assign a utility value to different outcomes.
The Bayesian horticulturalist ranked alternatives according to the amount of outside
labor required. Similarly, rats ranked the absence of shock over being shocked.
Second, the Bayesian model of learning requires that the actor make assumptions

92

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

<<

are

ie

pat

ws©

>

TL Up)

~ &

Ow
fas) JE

<[a()

“E 0

]

2

3

4

YEAR

Fig. 4.3 The average learning curve for a population of Bayesian horticulturalists.

about the nature of the environment. To update his estimate of the average yield of
his plot the Bayesian horticulturalist had to know the relationship between this
year’s yield and the long-run mean (i.e. he had to know the likelihood function).
This is analogous to a rat’s “assumption” that events close together in time are
causally related. Finally, the Bayesian model of rational choice requires that the
actor make an assumption about the initial state of the environment in the form of
a prior probability distribution. Thus, the horticulturalist’s initial guess about his
yield is analogous to the rat’s initial “assumption” that bright-noisy water was safe.
The problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist also illustrates a fourth general
feature of learning: Individuals must infer the state of the environment from “noisy”
observations, and because these observations are sometimes misleading, learning

is subject to errors. Suppose, for example, that the Bayesian horticulturalist’s initial
beliefs about the yield of his garden are approximately correct, but that the first year
is extremely dry, so that yields are extraordinarily low. Using Bayes’s law will
cause him to reduce his estimate of the most likely yield of his plot erroneously.
The simple conditioned responses of rats can also lead to errors. Consider, for
example, a rat who coincidentally becomes sick after eating a nutritious food item.
Subsequently the rat will avoid foods that taste similar, even though they may be
quite nutritious.
Rational choice, learning, and behavioral rules of thumb

The problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist also illustrates the fact that rational
choice is both difficult and complex. To satisfy the canons of rationality, the
Bayesian horticulturalist had to specify precisely an unrealistically large amount of
information about the environment in the form of the prior probability distribution
and the likelihood function and then perform computations that are too difficult for
anyone but mathematicians. As posed, the problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist
is an extremely simple problem—much, much simpler than any real decision facing
a tropical horticulturalist. The difficulty and complexity of most real problems is
SO great as to preclude normatively rational choice. Even modern corporations that

Models of Learning

93

can afford to expend enormous resources in gathering and analyzing data are unable
to conform to the canons of Bayesian rationality (Cyert and March, 1963).
Nonetheless,

both humans

and other animals

seem

to behave

in an under-

standable, adaptive fashion. How do they achieve the semblance of rationality? It
seems likely that the answer to this question is that both humans and other animals
use simple “rules of thumb” to make decisions. It is plausible that simple rules of
thumb may greatly reduce the cognitive complexity of decisions but still result in
behavior that closely approximates normatively rational behavior in some restricted
range of environments.
The best evidence for the existence of such rules of thumb in nonhuman animals
comes from optimal foraging theory. Recently, several authors have used Bayesian
decision theory to try to understand how animals learn to forage in unpredictable
environments (Arnold, 1978; Krebs, 1978; McNamara and Houston, 1980; Pulliam
and Dunford, 1980; Houston and McNamara, 1981). The work of Houston and

McNamara is of particular interest because it suggests that two patterns of behavior
very commonly observed in a variety of species by behavioral psychologists can be
understood as resulting from simple rules of thumb. McNamara and Houston
(1980) use Bayesian decision theory to analyze the problem of an animal foraging
in a patchy environment. In particular they ask, How long should an individual
forage unsuccessfully before it moves to another patch? They show that the answer
to this question depends on the previous rate of success in the patch. If the previous
rate of return was high, then even a short interval without success should provoke
the animal to leave. If, on the other hand, the patch has been only intermittently
rewarding, then the animal can forage unsuccessfully a long time before it is
optimal to leave. McNamara and Houston argue that this result is consistent with
the “partial reinforcement effect” that has been widely observed in behavioral
psychology. Animals that are always rewarded for a particular response
(“continuous reinforcement’’) stop responding quickly if reinforcement ceases. In
contrast, animals that are rewarded only intermittently for giving the response
(“partial reinforcement’) persist for quite some time after reinforcement is terminated. Houston and McNamara (1981) also show that the “probability matching”
behavior that has been observed by psychologists can be understood as a rule of
thumb approximating the optimal behavior in a variety of choice experiments.
Considerable experimental evidence suggests that humans also rely on simple
rules of thumb to guide their behavior. These rules of thumb, called “heuristics” by
psychologists, often work well, but occasionally they lead to behavior that is
irrational according to the canons of Bayesian rationality. People frequently must
assess the likelihood that a particular event, A, will occur based on knowledge of
the processes that cause the general class of events to which A belongs. Tversky
and Kahneman (1974) argue that people use what they call the “representativeness
heuristic” to answer this kind of question. Nisbett and Ross (1980) illustrate the
representativeness heuristic with the following experiment. Undergraduates are
asked, Which of the following three sequences of births of boys (B) and girls (G)
is more likely to occur in the next six births in a particular hospital (a) BBBBBB,
(b) GGGBBB, or (c) GBBGGB? Most people choose (c) because it is representa-

tive of the underlying random process, that is, most sequences of births will have
G’s and B’s intermixed. The correct answer is that all three sequences have almost

94

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

equal probability. The representative heuristic will frequently work quite well, but
as in this case it will occasionally fail. We will return to this area in psychology in
the next chapter.
There is also evidence from economics that humans make extensive use of
suboptimal rules of thumb. Conventional neoclassical economic theory assumes the
behavior of both individuals and firms is purely rational. However, economists
within the subdiscipline of behavioral economics have argued that this ideal is
unlikely to be realized because rational behavior is extremely costly. Detailed data
on the behavior of firms (e.g. Cyert and March, 1963) suggest that firms do not
optimize but rather use simple rules of thumb. Models of economic behavior that
rely on suboptimal rules of thumb developed by Simon (1957), Day (1967), Day
et al. (1974), and Winter (1966) share the qualitative features of the other models
described in this section.

The Force of Guided Variation
A simple model of learning
Behavioral psychologists and decision theorists developed their models of learning
in order to understand very different kinds of phenomena. Nonetheless, these
models (as well as the models of Simon, Day, and Houston and McNamara, which
are intermediate between these two extremes) share four features:

1. Individuals have objectives or guiding criteria that allow them to rank possible outcomes of their behavior.
2. Individuals make assumptions about the relationship between observed
events in the environment and the outcome of future decisions.
3. Because the observed events are imperfect indicators of the outcomes in the
local environment, learning leads to errors.

4. Individuals have an initial guess about what forms of behavior are best in the
local environment.

We think that the following simple model of learning captures these four features
of learning models. Suppose that each organism begins with an initial guess about
the kinds of behaviors that constitute the optimal mature phenotype in its local
environment. We will refer to this guess as the individual’s “initial phenotype,”
recognizing that it may often be a covert cognitive structure. We will suppose that
the initial phenotype can be quantified as a single number, X. In the case of the
Bayesian horticulturalist, the value of X would represent the horticulturalist’s
initial guess about the right amount of labor to invest in his neighbor’s garden, and
in the case of the rat, X would represent the rat’s initial rate of drinking bright-noisy
water. Next, we will suppose that the mature phenotype of the individual can also
be specified by a single number Y, which is measured on the same scale as X.
For
the Bayesian horticulturalist the value of Y would represent the amount of
labor
invested in the neighbor’s field after a year’s observation of his own yield,
and for
the rat Y would be the final rate of drinking bright-noisy water.
Organisms learn by experiencing their local environment and then modifyi
ng
their phenotype according to some criteria. This means that knowledge
of a particular individual’s determinants of learning should allow us to predict the
phenotype

The Force of Guided Variation

95

which that individual will develop in a given environment. We formalize this
relationship between learning and the environment as follows:

ViXSsta
(CE)
Y= ia

ase

= aX + (1 — a)\(I(H) + ©)

(4.9)

where L is a parameter which measures the propensity of an individual to rely on
individual learning, ['(H) is the objective (or goal) of the learning rule in environment H (for habitat), and € is a normally distributed random variable that represents

the effect of errors made during the learning process. We assume that € has a mean
of zero and a variance V.. In general, we expect learning to improve the fit of the
mature phenotype to the environment. This means that the objective of the learning
rule, '(H), will usually be different in environments in which the optimal pheno-

type is different. Thus, Equation 4.9 says that learning causes the mature phenotype
to lie a fraction

L/(L + V.) of the distance between the individual’s initial pheno-

type, X, and the objective of the learning rule in the local environment, I\(H). Thus,
the parameter a, = V./(V. + L), gives the fractional importance of cultural trans-

mission in determining mature phenotype. Notice that the relative importance of
individual learning depends on both an individual’s propensity to rely on individual
learning (measured by L) and the accuracy of the learning process (measured by
V.). When L > V,, individual behavior is mostly determined by individual learning; when L < V,, learning will have little effect on the initial phenotype. It is
worth noting that this model of learning is formally identical to the Bayesian model
of learning outlined in the previous section.
In what follows we assume that [(H) = H. This assumption simply means that
we are using the objective of the learning rule in a particular environment as a way
of characterizing the environment. We have made this assumption because it
simplifies the notation, and relaxing it does not cause any fundamental change in the
following argument.

The force of guided variation
Consider a hypothetical population in which young individuals acquire their initial
phenotypes by imitating the behavior of adults or, in other words, by some combination of vertical and oblique transmission. After cultural transmission, these
individuals modify their initial phenotypes according to the learning rule just
described. Because individual learning will usually cause mature phenotypes to be
different from initial phenotypes, the distribution of mature phenotypes will, in
general, be different from the distribution of initial phenotypes. Variants favored
by learning will be more common,

and those that are not favored will be less

common. Finally, suppose that mature individuals then serve as models for young
individuals in the next generation. This will cause the distribution of initial phenotypes in the next generation to be different from the distribution in this generation.
Thus, cultural transmission of the initial phenotype and its subsequent modification
by learning combine to produce a force increasing the frequency of the variants
favored by learning, even in the absence of natural selection. This effect is the
essence of guided variation.

96

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

To build a model of cultural evolution under the influence of the force of guided
variation, we proceed in two steps. First we determine the effects of learning on the
distribution of cultural variants within a single generation. Then we combine this
model with the blending model of the cultural transmission of a quantitative character derived in Chapter 3. The result is a recursion that describes how guided
variation changes the distribution of cultural variants from one generation to the
next. This recursion can be iterated to determine the long-run effects of this force.
To derive an expression that describes how individual learning changes the
distribution of initial phenotypes, we assume that the distribution of initial phenotypic values in a population before learning is P(X). Suppose this distribution has
mean X and variance V. It is shown in Box 4.4 that the mean, Y, and the variance,

U, of the distribution of phenotypes after learning, F(Y), are given by

Y =aX + (1 —a)H

(4.10)

U = av + (1 — a)*V,
whére, as above,

a = V,/(L + V,). Equation 4.10 says that the mean

of the

distribution of phenotypes after learning lies a fraction a of the distance between X,
the mean before learning, and H, the objective of the learning rule. Learning has
two opposing effects on the variance of X in the population. First, learning causes
individuals to modify their phenotypes toward a common goal, H, and this tends
to decrease the variance of X in the population. This effect is represented by the
term a’V. Second, however, errors made during learning increase the variance of
Box 4.4 From Equation 4.9 the mature phenotype, Y, of an individual with initial
phenotypic value X in environment H is
Y = aX + (1 — a)(H + e)
where a = L/(L + V.) and € is a normally distributed random variable with a mean

of zero and variance V. that represents the effects of learning errors. The mean value
of Y in the population after learning, Y is

Y= |iP(X)N(e){aX + (1 — a)(H + ©} dX de
= aX + (1 — a)H
The variance of Y in the population is given by

U= IhP(X)N(e) {aX + (1 — a)(H + €) — aX — (1 — a)H}? dX de

= I|P(X)N(e) {a(X — X)? + (1 — ae — a(t — aje(X — X)} dX de
and since the mean value of € is zero

=a’V + (1 — a)*V.

The Force of Guided Variation

97

X in the population. This effect is represented by the term (1 — a)’V.. Thus, the
net result of learning may be either to increase or to decrease the value of U relative
to V.
Equation 4.10 formalizes the idea that social learning and individual learning are
alternative ways of acquiring a particular behavioral variant; if an individual’s
mature phenotype is mostly determined by individual learning, then what he or she
acquired from his or her parents is not too important. The parameter a gives the
relative importance of cultural transmission in determining individual behavior
expressed as a fraction. When a is close to one, individuals are little influenced by
their own experience and instead simply imitate their parents. According to Equation 4.10, this causes the population mean to be mostly determined by the mean
behavior in the previous generation; the current environment has little effect. When

a is small, individual learning predominates. In this case the mean behavior of a
population is mostly determined by environmental conditions; there is little cultural
inertia. Finally, when a is around one-half, cultural transmission and individual

learning have about equal effects.
If no other forces act to change the distribution of phenotypes, the distribution
of mature phenotypes among the individuals who serve as models for the next
generation is simply F(Y). If we further suppose that cultural transmission proceeds
according to the n model blending rule described in Chapter 3, then the mean value
of X in the next generation, X’, is

X’ = aX + (1 —-—a)H

Ve) (17 aay(a"Vi

x
(ia)? AE,

(4.11)

where n, is the effective number of models and E is the effective amount of random

variation introduced during transmission. See Chapter 3, page 74, for an explanation of how these terms are calculated.
Equations 4.11 give the change in the distribution of cultural variation in a single
generation resulting from the action of cultural transmission and individual learning. Equations 4.11 say that when the determinants of learning are transmitted
culturally, learning itself causes the mean phenotypic value in the population to
move a fraction of the way toward the objective of the learning rule. The combination of learning and cultural transmission creates a force, guided variation. If the
objective of the learning rule is adaptive, this force improves the fit of the population to the local environment (i.e. it moves X toward H) even in the absence of

natural selection. The strength of the force of guided variation depends only on the

parameter a, = V./(L + V.), which represents the fractional importance of transmission. Unlike natural selection, the force of guided variation does not depend on

the amount of variation present.

The effect of guided variation over many generations. By iterating Equations 4.11
we can determine the long-run effects of guided variation. We will begin by
assuming that the environment is both constant and uniform. When this is true, the
equilibrium values of the population mean, X, and variance, V, can be found by

98

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

solving the equations

Nisiax+ (leva
.
:
V = (1/n\(a2Vt(1 — av.) + E
A

A

(4.12)

That is, equilibrium occurs when the forces due to transmission and learning
exactly balance, leaving the distribution of cultural variants unchanged.
Solving Equations 4.12 yields the following expressions for the equilibrium
mean and variance in the population:

X=H

oe

(1/n,)(1
— a)’V, + E

(4.13a)
(4.13b)

Equation 4.13a says that if the environment does not change the population eventually will reach an equilibrium at which the mean value of X in the population is
the value which is the goal of the learning process. This means that the most
common individuals are ones with the optimum initial phenotype. This result holds
as long as a is not exactly zero. Even if individual learning is weak, the population
mean will eventually achieve the optimum value. Equation 4.13b says that many
individuals in the population will be characterized by initial phenotypic values
which are larger or smaller than that value. This variation is due to errors made
during the learning process (measured by V.) and random variation introduced
during cultural transmission (measured by E). The effects of changing a on the
equilibrium variance will depend on the relative magnitudes of V. and E. If individual learning is much more error prone than social learning (V. > E), increasing the
relative importance of cultural transmission decreases the equilibrium variance. If
social learning is more error prone, then the reverse occurs.

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

The models in this book assume that culture has the properties of an inheritance
system. In the last section we saw that culture can have these properties only if
individual learning is not too important in determining behavior. In Chapter 3 we
reviewed several lines of empirical evidence which suggested that this assumption
was justified. In this section we ask, What are the conditions, if any, under which

a system of social learning with the properties of an inheritance system might have
evolved?
We begin by making some assumptions about how individuals acquire the
psychological predispositions that control the relative importance of learning and
cultural transmission. If these predispositions are acquired genetically, then they
can be understood in terms of the theory of genetic evolution. If they are acquired
culturally, then the specific nature of the cultural forces that affect their acquisition
will be important, and genetic theory will not be sufficient. We will begin by
assuming that the traits that determine the relative importance of individual and

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

99

social learning are themselves determined by genetically transmitted characters.
We do this for two reasons: First, when the capacity for culture in the human
species was first evolving, this probably was the case. A knowledge of how cultural
transmission could have been genetically adaptive will help us understand the
origin of cultural transmission.

Second, this is the most extreme sociobiological

assumption that one can make. If we start with this assumption but still show that
cultural transmission leads to the evolution of genetically maladaptive traits, then
we have the strongest indication that the forces of genetic and cultural evolution do
not always coincide.
Even assuming that the determinants of learning are transmitted genetically, we
will show that natural selection may act to reduce the importance of individual
learning and increase that of cultural transmission. In such cases novel forces may
affect the dynamics of cultural change. Many of these forces lead to outcomes that
are at variance with the usual predictions of sociobiological theory. Thus, the
existence of a plausible range of conditions in which it is adaptive for individual
behavior to be largely determined by social learning supports the hypothesis that the
existence of culture causes human evolution to be fundamentally different from that
of noncultural organisms.
We analyze the evolution of cultural transmission in three steps.

1. We describe a simple model in which alleles at a genetic locus affect the
relative importance of cultural transmission and individual learning, that is, the

value of the parameter L.
2. We analyze the evolutionary properties of the model in a homogeneous
environment. In this kind of environment individual learning will not be important
in determining behavior at evolutionary equilibrium unless random variation is
quite important.
3. We generalize the model to allow the environment to vary in space or time.
It is very plausible that natural selection should favor individual learning in a
variable environment since it causes individuals to develop the locally optimal
variant in each of a variety of different habitats. Nevertheless, we also find that
there are conditions under which selection favors weak learning.

A model of the genetic modification of the learning rule
To analyze the evolution of the relative importance of cultural transmission and
individual learning, we employ the model of cultural transmission with guided
variation just outlined. To allow the learning rule to evolve, we suppose that the
importance of learning in determining an individual’s mature phenotype is modified
by a haploid genetic locus with two alleles, e and f. Individuals who carry the allele
e have a learning rule characterized by the parameter L = Lo; individuals who carry
the allele f have a learning rule characterized by the parameter L = Ly) + 5L. We
assume that 8L is positive and small enough that terms of order SL? can be ignored
when compared to terms of order 5L. Let the frequency of allele f just after genetic
transmission be q.
To simplify the analysis, we make the following special assumptions: (1) the
cultural and genetic parents are drawn at random from the same pool of adults, and
(2) the genetic parents are no more likely to transmit the cultural trait to their genetic

100

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

offspring than any other individual in the population. The first assumption is
crucial, and we consider the effects of relaxing it in detail in Chapter 6. The second
assumption greatly simplifies the analysis because it means that each genotype
experiences that same pool of cultural variants. If only genetic parents are important in cultural transmission, then guided variation (and other forces as well)

may lead to a persistent nonrandom association between particular cultural variants
and particular genotypes. (This is analogous to linkage disequilibrium in genetic
evolution.) We have analyzed a model in which genetic parents participate in the
socialization of their own children. This more elaborate model yields similar results
as long as the magnitude of the force of guided variation is not too strong and
individuals other than the genetic parents have some role in enculturation.
With these assumptions, the distribution of initial phenotypes among individuals
of both genotypes, P(X), is the same among individuals of both genotypes. This
distribution has mean X and variance V. By setting L = Lo in Equation 4.10 one
can determine the distribution of mature phenotypes among individuals carrying the
allele e, F(Y). Similarly, by setting L = Ly + 65L in Equation 4.10 one can determine the distribution of mature phenotypes among individuals with allele f, F(Y).
Because individuals with different genotypes are characterized by different learning
rules, F(Y) and F’(Y) will usually be different. The learning process does not affect
the frequency of the two alleles, and thus the frequency of f after learning is also q.

The effect of natural selection
So far, we have assumed that the distribution of X does not change from the time
at which learning takes place until mating, genetic, and cultural transmission occur.
This assumption means that all mature phenotypes have the same probability of
becoming both parents and models. It seems likely that in many cases individuals
characterized by different phenotypes will have different probabilities of surviving
and acquiring the necessary resources to become parents. When this is the case,
natural selection will change the distribution of mature phenotypes. Because different genotypes will on average be associated with different mature phenotypes,
natural selection will also change the frequency of the two alleles that affect the
nature of individual learning.

Fitness functions. In order to model the effect of natural selection, we must specify
the probability that individuals who are characterized by different mature phenotypes become parents. We assume that the probability that an individual with the
mature phenotype Y becomes a parent in a particular environment, H, is given by
the function W(Y,H), which has the following Gaussian form:

W(Y,H) ="exp[—=(Y — H)*725]

(4.14)

As is shown in Figure 4.4, the optimum phenotypic value in environment H is the
value H. This means that the objective of the learning rule is also the optimal
phenotype in the local environment. This is a very important assumption because
it means that the learning rule causes individuals to develop adaptive mature
phenotypes. The farther away an individual’s phenotype is from the optimum, the

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

INDIVIDUALS
OF
FITNESS
(W(YIH))
ENVIRONMENT
IN
4H,
MATURE
PHENOTYPE
MATURE
THE
WITH
Y

101

H

PHENOTYPE

(Y)

Fig. 4.4 A Gaussian fitness function. The ordinate measures the fitness of individuals as
a function of their mature phenotype, measured by Y.

less likely it is that he or she will become a parent. The intensity of selection is
measured by the parameter S. As S becomes larger, the difference between the
fitness of the optimum mature phenotype and the fitness of any nonoptimum
phenotype becomes smaller. This kind of natural selection, called “stabilizing
selection,” generally has the effect of moving the population to the optimum and
then keeping it there. If the distribution Y is normal, the Gaussian form of W(Y ,H)

preserves the normality of the distribution of Y, which allows us to characterize this
distribution by its mean and variance alone.
To deduce the effect of selection on the frequency of the two genotypes, we first
calculate the average fitness of each genotype. The probability that an individual
with genotype e becomes a parent, W., is
W. = [wo

Jel aG wale€

(4.15)

Equation 4.15 says that the average fitness of the e allele is computed by multiplying the probability that a particular mature phenotype survives by the probability
that an individual carrying allele e acquires that phenotype and then integrating over
all mature phenotypes. Similarly, the probability that an individual with genotype
f becomes a parent is

W, = [worn F'(Y) dY

(4.16)

The two alleles have different average fitness because they affect the probability
that individuals carrying them will acquire any given mature phenotype. Also
notice that because F(Y) and F'(Y) depend on P(X), the distribution of initial

phenotypes in the population, the average fitness of the two genotypes will also
depend on P(X).

A condition for culture to be favored. Suppose that initially there were N parents
in the population. The number of individuals characterized by the gene e was

102

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

(1 — q)N and the number characterized by f was qN. Assuming that N is large, the
frequency of the allele f among parents after selection, q’, is

ae

(GN)

Witoseehen 7SPSeng Nee

(qN)W, + (1 —q@NIW.

=gW + (1 — g)W

(4.17)

By subtracting q from both sides of Equation 4.17 we can compute q’ — q, the
change in the frequency of f caused by selection:

qi -q = tol

=Wi

qw; + (1 — g)W.

ats

Equation 4.18 indicates that the allele f will increase if it has higher average
fitness than the allele e. Put another way, f, the genotype that depends slightly more
on learning, will increase in the population if a small increase in the propensity to
rely on individual learning (i.e. a small increase in the value of L) increases the
chance that individuals will acquire the optimal mature phenotype, H.
Assuming selection is weak, Box 4.5 shows that selection will favor larger

Box 4.5 Let W(L|X,V) be defined as the expected fitness of an individual whose
learning rule is characterized by the parameter L given that the distribution of cultural
variants in the population, P(X), is normal with mean X and variance V. Thus

W(L|X,V) = ||W(Y,H)Prob(Y
| X,L)P(X) dXdY
with this definition W. = W(Lo|X,V) and W; = W(Lo + 8L|X,V). If 8L is small
enough, we can express W; as follows:
d

-

==

W; = W. + 8L— W(L|X,V)
dL

roe

where the derivative is evaluated at L = Lo. We have assumed that the incremental

effect of the allele f, 5L, is greater than zero, and thus W; > W, implies that
d=

—
W(L | X,V)
Apu

=

0

L=Lo

When selection is weak, W(Y,H) is approximately

W(Y,H) = 1 — (1/2S)(Y — H)?
Then, by combining this expression with the definition of average fitness, one can
show that

W(L|X,V) = 1 — (1/28){a(L)-[(K — H)? + V] + [1 — a(L)P Ve}
nee a(L) = V./(V. + L). Differentiating this expression yields Condition 4.19 in
the text.

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

103

values of L (i.e. W; > W.) whenever

L<(H-Xy+V

(4.19)

By weak selection we mean that the change in the distribution of phenotypes within
any single generation is small. Since evolutionary change is usually slow, this
assumption is probably nearly always satisfied. As is shown in Figure 4.5, weak
selection requires that the width of the selection function be much greater than the
variance in mature phenotype, or, more formally, S >_U.
To intepret Equation 4.19, assume for a moment that X and V are held constant.
Then if the initial value of L is less than (H — X)? + V, L will increase until
eee
X)? + V. Similarly, if the initial value of L is greater than
(H — X)* + V, L will decrease until 4.19 is an equality. We will say that

L = (H — X)’ + V is the equilibrium value of L given that X and V are held
constant. In general X and V will change as L changes, and we will take this fact
into account in a moment.

WEAK
SELECTION
yo>, V

STRONG
SELECTION
SxV

FREQUENCY
OF MATURE
PHENOTYPIC
VALUE Y

(P(y))

Fig. 4.5 Illustration of the assumption of weak selection. H is the optimal phenotypic
value, and Y is a given nonoptimal value. As selection becomes stronger, the difference
in the fitness of Y and H increases.

104.

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

This result has a satisfying intuitive explanation. Inequality 4.19 says that the
relative importance of a given mode of phenotypic acquisition should be inversely
proportional to its error rate. To see this, recall from Equation 4.11 that L HAG ee WB)
and V./(L + V.) give the relative importance of individual learning and cultural

transmission, respectively. The parameter V. is a measure of the likelihood that
individual learning will cause an individual todevelop a maladaptive phenotype.
Similarly, the right-hand side of 4.19, (H — X)? + V, is a measure of the like-

lihood that a maladaptive phenotype will be acquired by cultural transmission.
Thus, ifL = (H — X)* + V, the relative importance of individual learning will be
proportional to the likelihood that cultural transmission will lead to a maladaptive

phenotype, and the relative importance of cultural transmission will be proportional
to the error rate of individual learning.

The equilibrium amount of cultural transmission in a constant environment
Equation 4.19 gives the equilibrium value of L, the propensity to rely on individual
learning, given that the distribution of phenotypes is constant with mean X and
variance V. However,

the distribution of cultural variants is not constant; it is

evolving, and the speed and direction of cultural change will depend on the learning
rule that characterizes the population. Therefore, to complete the analysis of the
evolution of individual learning and cultural transmission we must consider the
coevolution of the genes that affect the relative amount of individual learning and
distribution of cultural variants that determines the fitness of those genes.
To accomplish this task, we assume that guided variation acting on cultural
variation is much stronger than the force of natural selection. This allows us to
simplify the analysis in two important ways: First, natural selection will act to
change the frequency of cultural variants in much the same way that it changes the
frequency of alternative genetic variants. However, if the force of guided variation
is much stronger than selection, we can ignore the effects of selection acting
directly on cultural variation. This is a conservative assumption; including the
effect of natural selection on cultural variation increases the equilibrium importance
of cultural transmission (thus decreasing the equilibrium value of L). We return to
the effect of selection of cultural variations briefly later in this chapter and in detail
in Chapter 6. Second, the assumption that guided variation is stronger than selection means that the rate of cultural change is much more rapid than the rate of
genetic change, which in turn means we can assume that the distribution of cultural
variants is always in equilibrium when we consider the dynamics of gene frequencies.
The equilibrium mean value of X in the population is equal to H, the optimum
phenotypic value. Thus, assuming that the distribution of cultural variants is in
equilibrium, Equation 4.19 says that natural selection will cause the value of L to
increase whenever

fee

4h
A

(4.20)

We know from Equation 4.13, however, that V is a function of L. By substituting

the value V given in Equation 4.13 into Condition 4.20, we can determine when

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

105

the propensity to rely on individual learning (L) will increase, now allowing the
distribution of cultural variants to coevolve as the genes determining the balance of
individual and social learning change in frequency:
| pce (1/n,)L’°V,

+ E(L + V,)

(Lee) e770.)Ve

(4.21)

The value of L that satisfies 4.21 (expressed as an equality) is the “evolutionary
equilibrium” value, L”. This value characterizes populations in which the distribution of cultural variants and the frequency of genes affecting learning are in
equilibrium simultaneously.
To get an intuitive understanding of 4.21 it is useful to consider two special
cases:
1. Most of the cultural variation is due to errors made during individual learning
(V./n, > E). It is shown in Box 4.6 that in this case Condition 4.21 is not satisfied

for any value of L. This means that the evolutionary equilibrium value of L is zero;
at equilibrium individuals’ phenotypes are completely determined by cultural transmission and learning has no effect. This makes sense given the assumptions of the
model, since once the population reaches equilibrium the only effect of learning is
to increase the variance of X. This result should not be interpreted literally; we do
not expect that selection would really favor the complete absence of individual
learning. Rather, when the main source of cultural variation is errors made during

individual learning, selection will favor individuals who rely mostly on cultural
transmission and not on individual learning.

2. Most of the cultural variation present is due to errors made during social
learning (V./n. < E). This condition could arise in two ways. If V. ~ E but n, is

large, then 4.21 says that L will increase whenever L < E. When the number of
cultural parents is large, the equilibrium amount of variation in the population is
equal to the amount of new variation introduced each generation. Thus, the evolutionary equilibrium value of L is equal to E. Notice that if n, is large, it might

Box 4.6 If V./n. > E, then 4.21 becomes approximately

(i

cane
ieee)

Ve

()

The right-hand side of expression 1 decreases monotonically as the effective number
of cultural parents is increased, and thus cannot be satisfied unless it is satisfied for
the minimum value of n., ne = 1. Making this substitution and simplifying yields the
following condition, which must hold for L to increase:

V-

7

Bs
es
|b ae OM

This condition can never be true and thus L cannot increase when n. =

1. But since

the right-hand side of Expression 1 is smaller for any larger values of ne, Expression
1 can never be satisfied.

106

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

be that V. > E> V./ne, and therefore that the importance of individual learning,
L/(L + V.), could still be quite small. This condition could also arise if E > V..
In this case one can show that L* > E, and therefore that the amount of social

learning at equilibrium is small.
The most significant conclusion so far is that natural selection acting on genes
will favor weak individual learning (and therefore a system of social learning with
the properties of an inheritance system) anytime that (1) the environment is constant

and (2) the error rate of individual learning is substantially greater than that of social
learning. If imitation is reasonably accurate, as it seems to be, for example, in the
case of language, then we would expect that selection would favor strong learning
only for those traits for which individuals can accurately determine the optimal
behavior based on their own experience. This suggests that selection would favor
the acquisition of many traits by cultural transmission rather than individual learning.

Guided variation in a heterogeneous environment
So far we have shown that for a population in evolutionary equilibrium in a
constant, uniform environment, it is plausible that social learning will usually be
more important than individual learning in determining individual behavior. Perhaps this result should not surprise us. It is usually thought that the primary function
of individual learning is to enable organisms to respond to variable environments.
Given that the population mean reaches an equilibrium at the optimum value, the
main effect of learning is to introduce random variation. In a variable environment,
the mean phenotypic value may be quite different from the optimum. Therefore, it
seems plausible that in a variable environment the benefits of phenotypic flexibility
might compensate for the errors introduced during the learning process.
To investigate this question, we must add environmental variability to the model
of individual learning and cultural transmission. In this section, we will modify the
model so that different members of the population experience different environments. In the next section, we will allow environment to fluctuate in time. We refer

to the first kind of variable environment as heterogeneous and to the second kind
as fluctuating. We will show that in both cases there are plausible conditions which
favor cultural transmission and only weak individual learning.

A model of heterogeneous environments. There are two essential features of a
heterogeneous environment: (1) different individuals in the population experience
different environments and (2) there is some chance that naive individuals will

experience a different environment than the environment experienced by their

models. Environmental variation could occur. for many reasons. For example, the

environment might be spatially variable, with different individuals living in different habitats. Environmental heterogeneity could also arise from social causes:
different individuals might have different professions or belong to different ethnic
groups.
To formalize these ideas, we assume that individuals in the population learn and
do or do not become parents in environments characterized by different values of

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

107

H. The probability density governing the likelihood that an individual experiences
an environment characterized by the value H, f(H), is normal with mean 0 and

variance Vy. We can set the mean to zero without loss of generality since it merely
specifies the origin of the coordinate system in which environments are measured.

The variance of f(H), Vy, is a measure of the amount of environmental hetero-

geneity. If Vy is large compared to S (recall that 1/S is a measure of the strength
of selection), we will say that there is substantial heterogeneity.
The mean and variance of the distribution of cultural variants will usually be
different in habitats characterized by different values of H, since learning will tend
to increase the frequency of the most adaptive variant. Let X(H) and V(H) be the

mean and variance before learning among individuals who will experience environment H. From Equation 4.11, the mean and variance after learning are

Y(H) = aX(H) + (i — aH

(4.22)

U(H) = 22V(H) + (1 — a)*V,

(4.23)

and

Once again we assume that any selection that occurs is weak when compared to any
effect of the transmission of guided variation, and therefore we can ignore the effect
of selection on the distribution of cultural variants.
To formalize the idea that individuals may experience different environments
than did their models, consider an individual who will experience environment H.
We suppose that there is a probability (1 — m) that any of this individual’s models
also experienced environment H and a probability m that they were drawn randomly
from the population as a whole. Thus m is a measure of the extent of cultural
contact between individuals experiencing different environments. For example, m
might be a migration rate; a fraction (1 — m) of the individuals in a particular
habitat remain in that habitat, while a fraction m emigrate and are replaced by
individuals drawn randomly from other habitats.
Box 4.7 shows that with these assumptions the mean and variance of initial
phenotypes in the next generation as a function of H are

X'(H) = (1 — m)Y(H) + mY
V'(H) = au/ng

(4.24)

— m)U(H) + m [um f(h) dh

+m |[Y(h) — Y]/?f(h)dh

on

+ m(1 — m)[Y(H) - ai - E

where Y= fY(h) f(h) dh, the average phenotype in all environments. Equation 4.24
says that mixing models from different environments moves the mean in a particular environment a fraction m of the distance toward the mean initial phenotype in
all habitats. According to 4.25, mixing has two effects on the variance: first it

causes the variance in a particular environment to move toward the average variance in the population (just as in the case of the mean), and second it increases the

108

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

Box 4.7 Let F(Y|H) be the distribution of mature phenotypes in habitats characterized by environment H. Consider a naive individual in a habitat characterized by the
environment H. The probability that the naive individual draws a model from his or
her own habitat is (1 — m), and the probability that a model is drawn from some other

habitat characterized by an environment between h andh + dh is mf(h)dh. Thus, the
mean value of mature phenotypes among the models of individuals in environment H,
Y'(H), is

Y'(H) = (1 — m) iYF(Y|H)dY + m |iyF(y |h)f(h)dh dy
= (1 — m)Y(H) + m iY(h)f(h)dh
Similarly, the variance of mature phenotypes among models of the individuals in
environment H, U’(H), is

U'(H) = (1 — m) |Y?F(Y|H)dY + m i|y?F(y|h)f(h)dh dy — Y’(H)?
Integrating and then adding and subtracting m f Y(h)*f(h)dh and mY? to the righthand side of this expression yields 4.25 in the text.

variance in environment H an amount proportional to the average of the squared
difference between the mean in that environment and all other environments. Thus,

mixing will generally act to increase the variance of the initial phenotypes, and this
effect will be strongest in the most extreme environments.

Equilibrium in a heterogeneous environment. To compute the equilibrium importance of individual and social learning in a heterogeneous environment, we
proceed as we did in the case of a uniform environment. First we determine the
equilibrium distribution of cultural variants, holding the relative importance of
individual and social learning constant (i.e. the value of L). Then, assuming that
cultural evolution occurs much more quickly than genetic evolution, we determine
the value of L that can resist invasion by modifying alleles assuming that the
distribution of cultural variants is in equilibrium.
It follows from the symmetry of the model that at equilibrium the average of X
over all environments must be zero. Using this fact and Equations 4.22 and 4.24,
it can be shown that the equilibrium mean in environment H, X(H), is given by

X(H) =

Cem)

1a)

1 — (1 —m)a

(4.26)

The mean behavior in any particular environment results from the balance of two
forces. The force of guided variation acts to move the mean toward the local
optimum (H); the influx of models from other environments moves the population
toward the mean of the entire population (which at equilibrium must be zero).
Equation 4.26 says that the point at which this balance occurs depends on the
relative strength of these two processes, measured by 1 — a and 1 — m, respectively.

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

109

The equilibrium variance in environment H, V(H), can be computed by
combining Equations 4.23 and 4.25. This results in a complicated expression for
V(H) which is proportional to H’, which means that there is more variation among
individuals living in extreme, uncommon environments than among those living in
central, common environments. At equilibrium the average variance in all environments, V, is given by
2a

~

(1 — a)°V, + Val — (1 — m)’) (=a)

v=

2

+ nE
(4.27)

n. — a

According to Equation 4.27, the average variance in all environments depends on
the amount of error introduced by individual learning (V.), the error rate during
cultural transmission (E), and the amount of environmental variability confronting
the population (Vj). Increasing any of these values increases the average value of
the variance.
The equilibrium amount of cultural transmission. Determining the equilibrium
amount of cultural transmission is complicated by the fact that different values of
L will be favored in different environments. Recall that in deriving Relation 4.19,
we made no assumptions about the environnent. This means that in any particular
environment,

alleles increasing L will be favored by selection whenever 4.19 is

satisfied, that is,

L < (X(H) — H)? + Vi)

(4.28)

Since both X and V increase as H increases in absolute value, larger values of L,
and therefore less cultural transmission, will be favored in more extreme environ-

ments. This makes sense because in extreme environments the distribution of
cultural variants is not as closely adapted to local conditions as it is in more
common environments.
Here we will assume that the genes that control the relative importance of
individual learning and cultural transmission respond to the average conditions in
all environments. This assumption will be reasonable if the amount of gene flow
between habitats is large compared to the strength of selection on alleles affecting
the value of L. Once again assume that there are two alleles, e and f; individuals

carrying e have a learning rule characterized by the parameter Lo, and those
carrying f have a rule characterized by Ly + 8L, where 6L is a small positive
number. It can be shown that the allele f, and therefore larger values of L, are
favored whenever

<

——_———
=

ue vil — (1 =

|as
+V

;
4.29
Se,

This condition is a straightforward generalization of 4.19 to the case of a heterogeneous environment. It says that the optimum value of L is equal to the average
quality of information available from models and that individuals using the optimal
rule will weight individual learning and cultural transmission according to their
respective error rates.

110

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

The population will be in evolutionary equilibrium when the left-hand and
right-hand sides of 4.29 are equal. While we have not been able to determine
analytically the values of L that satisfy this condition, they are easy to determine
numerically. Figure 4.6 plots the relative importance of cultural transmission in
determining behavior, a(L), when L is at its evolutionary equilibrium value, L , as
a function of the error rate during individual learning (V.) for three levels of
mixing (m).

1.0

0.8

0

10

2.0

3.0

Ve
Fig. 4.6 The relative importance of cultural transmission,

a = V./(V. + L*), assuming

that L is at its equilibrium value, L*, in a heterogeneous environment as a function of the

error rate during individual learning for three rates of mixing (m), assuming E = O and
ne = 1.

These figures show that the evolutionary equilibrium amount of culture in a
heterogeneous environment depends strongly on both the amount of error
introduced by individual learning and the amount of mixing between environments.
When it is difficult for individuals to determine accurately what behavior is best in
their environment (i.e. V. is large) and there is not too much mixing of models

between environments (i.e. m is small), natural selection acting on genes can favor
a system of social learning with the properties of an inheritance system. These
results make sense. When V., is large, individual learning is error prone and therefore costly. When m is small, small amounts of learning generate a strong enough
evolutionary force to keep the mean in each environment near the optimum. Thus,
a population that relies mostly on cultural transmission can achieve the benefits of
phenotypic flexibility and still avoid most of the costs of individual learning.
Guided variation in a temporally fluctuating environment
To model a fluctuating environment, we assume that the optimum phenotypic
value, H,, fluctuates from generation to generation. We assume that the error rate
of individual learning (measured by V,) is constant. This assumption greatly
simplifies the analysis. Recall that the recursions for the variance of X in the
population did not depend on the mean or the value of H. Thus, as long as V, is
constant, the variance of X in the population will approach its equilibrium value

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

111

deterministically without regard to fluctuations in H. We simply assume that the
variance at equilibrium is given by Equation 4.13.
The nature of the environmental fluctuations is determined by the sequence of
values H,, H>, H3,. . .,H,. We assume that this sequence of numbers is an auto-

correlated time series with the following moments:
Mean(H,) = 0

(4.30a)

Van H)i— Va
Cov(H,,H, - ;)= Vu R'!

(4.30b)
(4.30c)

Equation 4.30a says that the long-run mean of the values of H, is zero. Once
again this assumption really just specifies the origin on the line which we use to
measure H,. Equation 4.30b determines the amount of variability in the environment. If the variance in the values of the H;, Va, is much greater than the variability
in fitness within a single generation (S), then we say that the environmental
fluctuations

are large. If, on the other hand,

Vy < S, then the environmental

fluctuations are small. Equation 4.30c specifies the extent to which the environments in consecutive generations are similar. If R =

1, the environments in con-

secutive generations are identical; if R = 0, the environment in one generation is
completely uncorrelated with the environment in the next; finally, for intermediate
values of R there is an intermediate similarity between environments in successive
generations.

The stationary distribution of X,. When the environment fluctuates from generation
to generation, it presents the evolving population with a “moving target.” In each
generation guided variation moves the mean value of X in the population toward
the current optimum. Then the optimum shifts position, and the population moves
toward the new value. The mean phenotype of the population never comes to
equilibrium, but instead endlessly chases after the current optimum as it fluctuates
randomly around the long-run optimum. The appropriate generalization of an
equilibrium in a randomly fluctuating environment is the “stationary distribution.”
After an initial period in which the population is influenced by the initial conditions,
it comes to a kind of probabilistic equilibrium, in which the probability that the
mean takes on any particular value is a constant. The distribution of these long-run
probabilities of X, is called its stationary distribution.
To calculate the stationary distribution of X,, we begin byexplicitly solving 4.11
to obtain NG as a function of the initial value of the mean, Xo, and t. As is shown
in Box 4.8, this results in

ae Noa al

en)

t-1

ae eH,

(4.31)

i=1

If 0 < a < 1, the first term in this equation becomes smaller as t becomes larger.
This means that the population eventually “forgets” its initial position as it is jostled
around in a random environment. Because of this effect, the stationary distribution

can be calculated using only the second term in 4.31. As it turns out, we do not need
to calculate the entire distribution; we only need to calculate the mean and variance.
To see why, we must consider how to measure genetic fitness in a temporally
varying environment.

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

112

Box 4.8 To see why Equation 4.31 is the solution of Equation 4.11, we begin at time
t = 1. Then

X1 = aXo + (1 — a)Ho
Next consider t = 2:

Xo = aX, + (1 — aH
a(aXo + (1 — a)Ho) + (1 — a)
a*Xo + (1 — a)[aHo + Hi]
Next consider t = 3:

X; = a{a?X + (1 — a)[aHo + HiJ} + (1 — a)H>
a? Xo ap (1 =

a)[a* Ho oF aH,

AE Hz]

It should be clear that repeating this process i times will result in 4.31. The reader can
also verify that 4.31 is the solution of 4.11 directly, by substituting 4.31 into 4.11.

The evolutionary equilibrium amount of cultural transmission in a fluctuating
environment. We want to determine the value of L, the propensity to rely on
individual learning, favored by natural selection acting on genes in a fluctuating
environment. There are a variety of ways to approach this question (see Karlin and
MacGregor,

1974; Slatkin, 1978; or Roughgarden,

1979, for reviews). We have

chosen to simply find the value of L that maximizes geometric mean fitness. We
are motivated by the fact that a variety of studies have shown that modifying alleles
can invade a population in a temporally fluctuating environment only if they have
a higher geometric mean fitness than the alleles already present in the population
(Haldane and Jayakar, 1963; Gillespie, 198la). (The reader should be warned
however that Gillespie, 1981b, has demonstrated at least one case for which this
condition does not hold.)

To model selection in a fluctuating environment, we assume the genetic fitness
function given by Equation 4.14, except that now the fitness-maximizing phenotype, H,, fluctuates from generation to generation. In particular, we assume that the
width of the fitness function, S, is a constant. (This model of natural selection in

a random environment is adapted from Slatkin and Lande, 1976.) The geometric
mean fitness of a population is defined as e to the expected value of the logarithm
of the average fitness, or

Geom(W,) = exp{E{In(W)}]

(4.32)

W, = |W(Y,H,) R(Y) dY

(4.33)

where

The expectation, E{-}, is calculated using the stationary density of W.. W, is a
function of L because L will affect the distribution of mature phenotypes, F,(Y).

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

113

Box 4.9 Using the definitions of W(Y, H) (Eq. 4.14) and F(Y) (Eq. 4.10), the average
fitness, W,, can be written

W= \(20U,)'/? exp{—(Y — X))?/2U, — (Y — H,)?/2S}dY
Completing the square in the exponent as in Box 4.3 and integrating the resulting
expression with respect to Y yields
SS

=

S

ye

—a?(X,—H,)”

ie Is
+ a) exp| 2(U,+ S)

If selection is weak enough, terms of order (U/S)? can be ignored. Thus in (W,) is
approximately

In(W,) ~ — (1/2S){U, + a(X, — H,)?}
Substituting the expression for U; given in Equation 4.10 and taking the expected
value with respect to the stationary distribution of X; yields

E{In(W,)} ~ —(1/2S)(a?(E{(X, — H,)?} + V] + (1 - a)"V.)
Differentiating this expression with respect to L (recall that a is a function of L) yields
4.34 in the text.

(We actually find the value of the natural logarithm of the geometric mean fitness
because this transformation simplifies the calculations and does not alter the result.)
It is shown in Box 4.9 that increasing L will increase geometric mean fitness
whenever

Dri

Hy

(4.34)

To evaluate the expectation in 4.34 we use the expression for X, as a function
of H,, H,-;, H,-2, and so on, given in 4.31. This expression is substituted into 4.32,

which results in an expression that only depends on the variances and covariances
of the H,. It can be shown (Boyd and Richerson, 1983) that this process results in

the following expression for E{(X, — H,)’}:

ee
eS)

ee

ie)
(1 + a)(1 — aR)

(4.35)

To find the evolutionary equilibrium value of L, L’, we reexpress 4.34 as an
equality and solve for L. Figure 4.7 plots the values of V./(V. + L’), the relative
importance of cultural transmission when L = L’, for several values of R.

The results shown in these figures are strikingly similar to those obtained
assuming a heterogeneous environment. They suggest that natural selection acting
on genes will favor extensive amounts of cultural transmission whenever it is

difficult for individuals to determine the optimal behavior (i.e. V, is large) and the

environment is sufficiently predictable (i.e. when R, our measure of generation-togeneration similarity in environments, is large). The fact that these two quite
different models yield very similar results also suggests that these results are robust.

114

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

@)

10

2.0

3.0

Ve
Fig. 4.7 The relative (fractional) importance of cultural transmission,

a = V./(V- + L*),

as a function of the variance of errors made during individual learning, V., for three values

of the environmental autocorrelation, R, assuming that L is at its equilibrium value, L*,
and that E = 0 and n, = 1.

Adding learning costs
So far we have assumed that the accuracy with which individuals can assess the
local environment (measured by the parameter V.) is fixed. It seems plausible that

in many circumstances individuals may be able, at some cost, to improve the
quality of the information upon which individual learning is based. This assumption
is important because the accuracy of individual learning strongly influences the
optimal balance between individual learning and cultural transmission in both
heterogeneous and fluctuating environments. When individual learning is
sufficiently inaccurate, natural selection acting on genes will favor the evolution of
cultural transmission. It could be argued that natural selection would not favor such
inaccurate individual learning, and thus if the accuracy of individual learning is
allowed to evolve, cultural transmission will not be favored. In this section we

modify our model so that the accuracy of individual learning can evolve. Based on
the analysis of this model we will argue that culture still can be favored.
To model the evolution of individual learning, we must modify the fitness
function so that increasing the accuracy of individual learning has costs. By this we
mean that increasing the amount of resources allocated to increasing the accuracy
of individual learning decreases the amount of resource devoted to some other
aspect of the phenotype. This assumption makes sense if one thinks of learning as
analogous to a sampling problem in statistics. For a given sample size, the variance
of an estimator is fixed. To increase the accuracy of the estimate, one must decrease
the variance of the estimator, which in turn means one must increase the sample
size. But increasing the sample size increases the cost of the experiment. If this
were not the case, selection would always favor perfectly accurate learning.
We formalize the costs of learning by modifying the fitness function as follows:

W(Y,V.) = exp{—(Y — H)?/2S} — CCV.)

(4.36)

where C(V.) is a convex function with the form shown in Figure 4.8. This form of

The Evolution of Cultural Transmission

115

C(V,)

V,e
Fig. 4.8 The assumed form of C(V.) which gives the fitness cost of changing the accuracy
of individual learning assuming all other aspects of phenotype are held constant.
C(V.) formalizes the assumption that an incremental decrease in V, becomes more

costly as V. becomes smaller. This assumption is consistent with the sampling
analogy outlined above.
We want to determine the value of V. that maximizes fitness in a heterogeneous
environment. We have analyzed an analogous model assuming a fluctuating environment, and the results are very similar. Assuming that L is at its equilibrium
value, L’, it can be shown that the following condition must be true for V, to be an

optimum:

(yee
SUE tv.)

dV

C(V.)

(4.37)

The left-hand side of Equation 4.37 represents the incremental decrease in fitness
caused by a change in V, due to more accurate learning, and the right-hand side
represents the incremental decrease in fitness due to the costs of more accurate
learning. In Figure 4.9, incremental cost and incremental benefit in terms of fitness

<— marginal cost of information

mal

va marginal benefit of information

MARGINAL
OR
COST
BENEFIT

|

i]0

]

Ve,.m=1

V4, m=.02

2.0

3.0

Fig. 4.9 The marginal cost and benefit of changing the error rate of individual learning (Ve)
in a heterogeneous environment for three values of m. Optimal values of V. occur at the
intersections of the marginal cost and benefit curves.

116

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

are plotted as a function of V., for several values of m, the appropriate measure of
environmental predictability. There are two qualitative results of interest: First,
increasing the cost of information increases the optimal value of V.. Thus, as
individual learning becomes more costly, selection favors investing in less of it.
From our previous results, we know that decreasing the quality of information
increases the optimal amount of imitation. Thus making individual learning more
costly will tend to favor more imitation. Second, increasing the predictability of the
environment decreases the optimal amount of individual learning. This makes sense
because as the environment becomes more predictable, the behavior of models is,
on the average, closer to the optimal behavior, and thus a smaller investment in

acquiring costly information by individual learning is justified.
Reprise: The evolution of cultural transmission
In the last several sections we have been building an argument that natural selection, acting on genes, can lead to the evolution of a system of cultural transmission
with the properties of an inheritance system. The behavior of contemporary primates suggests that the human species evolved from a hominid with elaborate
individual learning abilities but only a limited reliance on social learning. The
models indicate that, under the appropriate conditions, natural selection could favor
an increased reliance on social learning relative to individual learning in such an
organism.
The key assumption in the argument is that individual learning is imperfect.
Individuals observe their environment and, based on these observations, determine

how to behave in the local environment.

Because the information available to

individuals is incomplete, and because individuals have limited cognitive abilities,

individual learning leads to errors. The error rate of individual learning can be
reduced, but because the time and energy devoted to acquiring better information
cannot be allocated to other fitness-enhancing activities, such reductions are costly.
Thus the quality of individual learning for any given trait should depend on the costs
of learning. When it is easy to determine the locally best behavior, we expect
learning to be quite accurate, but when it is difficult, individual learning should be
inaccurate.
Given that learning is imperfect, the models analyzed in the last several sections
indicate that natural selection will favor an increased reliance on culturally inherited
beliefs whenever (1) the error rate of individual learning is substantially greater than
that for social learning and (2) the environment is reasonably predictable. When
behaviors modified by individual learning are subsequently transmitted to others,
the force of guided variation affects both the mean and variance of behavior in the
population. The strength of the force affecting the mean depends on the importance
of cultural transmission relative to individual learning in determining individual
behavior. If individual behavior is determined mostly by individual learning, then
the force of guided variation is strong and the population mean moves rapidly to
the value favored by learning. In the limit of no cultural transmission, this occurs
in a single generation. If individual behavior is mostly determined by cultural
transmission, then guided variation is weak, and the population will move more
slowly toward the value favored by learning. The relative importance of individual

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

117

learning and cultural transmission also affects the variance of the population. If
individual learning dominates, then most of the errors made during individual
learning are translated into behavior; if cultural transmission dominates, a smaller

amount of error affects behavior. When the force of guided variation is strong,
more variation is introduced into the population in each generation and the equilibrium variance is larger than when guided variation is weak. Thus the results of
our models

make

sense:

when

individual learning is inaccurate,

increasing the

importance of cultural transmission reduces the variance in the population; when
environments are predictable, a weak force is adequate to keep the mean of the
population near the optimum.
It is our intuition that it is often difficult for individuals to determine the locally
optimal behavior. Consider, for example, the problem of the Bayesian horticulturalist. The experience of any single year is affected by a large number of random
factors, the weather, insects, the luck of his neighbors, the political fortunes of the
big man, and so on. To get an adequate estimate of the best behavior might take
a sample of many years, yet the horticulturalist must decide what to do the first year
he farms. We believe that many human decisions have this character. Because they
have many effects that are spread out over a long period of time, it is difficult for
individuals to determine the best choice by trial and error; because the consequences of alternative choices depend on a complex, variable, hard-to-understand
environment, it is difficult for individuals to deduce the optimal behavior. The
result is that a reliance on individual learning will lead to frequent errors. If this
intuition is correct, and if the social learning theorists (whose work we reviewed

in Chap. 3) are also correct that information can be acquired easily and accurately
by social learning, then the models analyzed here suggest that a strong dependence
on cultural transmission usually provides a better way to acquire beliefs about the
environment than a strong dependence on individual learning.

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission
So far in this chapter we have shown that social learning is favored relative to
individual learning when environments are predictable and it is difficult for individuals to determine the locally favored phenotype. It could be argued that these are
exactly the conditions which would also favor the genetic transmission of behavior,
since in predictable environments selection will increase the frequency of genes
leading to the development of the locally favored phenotype. This intuition has
some theoretical support. Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1983) have analyzed a
model in which individuals acquire one of two phenotypic variants either culturally
or genetically. Assuming a constant, uniform environment, they show that genetic
transmission will replace cultural transmission as long as the error rate of cultural
transmission is higher than that of genetic transmission. It is important to note that
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman’s model does not include the effects of the transmission of guided variation.
To make the argument for the adaptiveness of cultural transmission persuasive,
we must also demonstrate that there are conditions under which it is better to
acquire one’s initial behavioral predispositions by social learning than to inherit
them genetically. Contrary to Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, we think such condi-

118

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

tions exist. To demonstrate this, we compare the geometric mean fitness of a
“cultural” population with a “genetic” population in a fluctuating environment. In
the cultural population, an individual’s mature phenotype is transmitted to the next
generation as in previous sections of this chapter. In the genetic population, it is the
initial “phenotype” (or, more properly, the genes that determine it) that is transmitted. Both populations are assumed to have identical capacities for individual
learning. The crucial difference between them is that the force of guided variation
does not affect the evolution of the distribution of initial phenotypes in the genetic
population. We shall see that this difference creates a plausible range of conditions
under which the cultural population has a higher geometric mean fitness than the
genetic population.

Genetic transmission of the learning rule
To derive a recursion for the distribution of values of the initial phenotype, X, under
the assumption that X is genetically transmitted, we assume that the life cycle has
three stages, genetic transmission, followed by learning, and finally selection. We
begin the life cycle just after genetic transmission. At this stage we assume that the
distribution of X in the population is normal with mean X and variance V.
Since Weismann (1893), one of the fundamental tenets of evolutionary theory

has been that developmental events in an individual’s life do not affect its germ cells
and thus cannot affect the genetic material that the individual transmits to the next
generation. This means that learning has no effect on the distribution of X. Hence,
the mean and variance after learning are still X and V, respectively.

The effect of selection. To deduce the effect of selection on the distribution of
initial phenotypes, we calculate the average fitness of an individual with the initial
phenotype X. We denote the probability density that an individual develops the
mature phenotype Y in environment H given that it has the initial phenotype X as
Prob(Y|X,H). Then the probability that an individual with initial phenotype X
survives to reproduce in environment H, W,,(X,H), is

W,y(X,H) = [wor Prob(Y|X,H) dY

(4.38)

Equation 4.38 says that the probability that an individual with initial phenotype X
survives in environment H, W,, (the average fitness), is equal to the product of the

fitness of an individual with mature phenotype Y in environment H and the probability that an individual with initial phenotype X develops a mature phenotype Y,
integrated over all values of Y.
With the assumptions already made about the nature of learning (Eq. 4.9) and

selection (Eq. 4.14), we can calculate the form of W,y(X,H). It is shown in Box
4.10 that

Wiy(X,H) * exp[—(X — H)?/2S,,]
where

Say

eySista
(iene
a

(4.39)

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

119

Box 4.10 From Equation 4.10 the probability that an individual with initial phenotype X develops mature phenotype Y is normally distributed with mean aX +

(1 — a)H and variance (1 — a)? V.. Thus the integrand in Equation 4.38 is the product

of two Gaussian functions of Y. Once again we can use Expression 1 from Box 4.3
to show that 4.38 has the form

a

1

va

Bec) = |
fr = aw
alex

—(Y — M,)?

exp| 2V,
ay

eer

ea

Ba

where M, and V, are parameters that could be computed by completing the square as
in Box 4.3. Performing the integral with respect to Y yields the expression

saved

S

ibe

(eaves)

> El

—[H — (aX + (1 — a)H)fP

eed Savas)

which is proportional to

WeOGH) = 8.0L

—a?(X — H)?

ATES

Figure 4.10 shows that W,,(X,H) represents stabilizing selection on the initial
phenotype, X. The optimal initial phenotype in a particular environment is H, the
optimal mature phenotype. The width of W,,, given by S,,, is inversely proportional
to the strength of selection on X. Notice that the strength of selection on the initial
phenotype (measured by 1/S,,) is always weaker than selection on the mature
phenotype (measured by 1/S). Two factors cause this result: errors made during
learning and development weaken selection on X (i.e. V. > 0), and learning itself
weakens selection because it causes the mature phenotype of individuals to move
closer to the optimum phenotype. To understand this effect, consider the case when
a = 0. In this case all individuals develop the optimum phenotype independent of
their initial phenotypes. As one would expect, as a — 0, S,, >

%, which means

that selection has no effect on X.

NESS@UNERS
PI

PHENOTYPIC

UNITS

(X&Y)

Fig. 4.10 The relationship between the expected fitness of genotypic value X, W..(X|H),
and the fitness of mature phenotypic value Y, W(Y|H).

120

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

We can now derive the effect of selection on the mean phenotype in the
population. Once again, suppose that just after transmission the distribution of X

in the population, Q(X), is normal with mean value X and variance V. Then the
distribution of X after selection, Q’(X), is
OX)

Q(X) Wav(X,H)
SQCX) Way(X,H) dX

=

(4.40)

That is, to calculate the frequency of a particular value of X after selection, one
multiplies the frequency of those individuals before selection by the probability that
they survive and then normalizes by the average probability of survival (or average
fitness) so that the frequencies integrate to one. Given the distribution of X in the
population after selection we can calculate its mean, X’. It is shown in Box 4.11

that the mean value of X after selection is

X’ =7X +(1- yH

(4.41)

where

Say

a Sica
Thus, selection moves the mean of the population a fraction y of the distance
between the mean before selection and the optimum in the environment. Notice that
as S,, becomes large, -y approaches one, or in other words, as selection becomes

weaker the population moves a smaller distance toward the optimum of X in a
Box 4.11 The numerator of the right-hand side of Equation 4.40 is proportional to

So

Q(X) W..(X,H) « exp

oY

56

From Result 1 in Box 4.3, we know that

Q(X)Way(X,H)

=(X
— x’)

exp|

2V

where

_ Sw X + VH
Swt+V

SayV
Davete V.
Since the denominator normalizes the ratio so that it integrates to one, Q’(X) is a

frequency distribution with mean X' and variance V’.

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

121

single generation. Recall that S,, becomes larger as learning becomes more important in determining the mature phenotype of the population (i.e. a > 1). Thus,
efficient learning makes for weak selection on the determinants of learning.
Genetic transmission. In order to derive the effect of genetic transmission, we will

assume that the value of X in any given individual is determined by alleles at a
number of different genetic loci and that each of these alleles has only a small
additive effect on the value of X. The genetical theory of the evolution of such
polygenic, quantitative characters is discussed in Falconer (1960), Lande (1976,
1977, 1979, 1980), and Bulmer (1980). We further assume that mating takes place

randomly with respect to the value of X. It is shown in all of these references that
with these assumptions the mean value of X after transmission, X’, is simply X.
An expression can also be derived for the effect of transmission and mutation on
the variance of a character under polygenic control (Lande, 1976, 1977). These
calculations are beyond the scope of this book; however, it turns out that under

some circumstances the recursion for the variance does not depend on the mean of
the population. This means that once the variance reaches an equilibrium it will
remain constant, unaffected by any fluctuations in the mean. Generally, we will
simply assume that the variance is at equilibrium at a value, V,.
These results should not be surprising. In Chapter 3 we saw that genetic transmission by itself had no effect on the frequency of alleles at a single locus. When
there are many loci, both the segregation of alleles at a single locus and the
recombination of alleles at different loci cause a shuffling of the genome. This
shuffling affects the variance of the character in the population in a fairly complex
way. However, because the frequency of different alleles remains constant, and
their effects are additive, the shuffling has no effect on the mean. While this result
may seem obvious, as we have seen, it differs sharply from the case in which the
initial phenotype is inherited culturally.
This simple model of the genetic transmission of one of the determinants of
learning illustrates three points. First, learning by itself has no effect on the
frequency of the determinants of learning in the population. Second, selection acts
to shape the determinants of learning just as it would any other character. Third, as
learning becomes more effective in causing the organism to develop an adaptive
phenotype the effect of selection on the initial phenotype is weakened. That is, as
the organism’s skill at moving toward the optimum increases, selection for a good
a priori guess about the environment decreases.

The interaction of guided variation and natural selection
Natural selection will affect the distribution of phenotypes within a generation in
the cultural population in much the same way that it does in the genetic one. After
individual learning, selection increases the frequency of some mature variants and
decreases the frequency of others. In the first part of this chapter we assumed that
selection was weak enough compared to guided variation so that its direct effect on
the distribution of cultural variants could be ignored. To compare the effects of
genetic and cultural transmission fairly, however, we need to investigate the interaction of the force of guided variation and natural selection. By analogy with

122

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

PCY)
Equation 4.40, the distribution of mature phenotypes after selection,

F(Y) WC(Y)

EY as so
SFCY) W(Y) dY

1s

4.42
Oe

In contrast to Equation 4.40, we weight the frequency of the mature phenotype after
learning by the fitness of the mature phenotype. A derivation similar to that given
in Box 4.11 shows that the mean value of Y after selection, Y’, is

Y'’ =cX + (1-—0)H

(4.43)

where
aS
c=

Ste U-

Since it is the mature phenotype that is transmitted, the mean value of the initial
phenotype in the next generation is also Y’. We assume that the variance of initial
phenotype is at equilibrium at V. and the variance of mature phenotype is at
equilibrium at U,.
Equation 4.43 says that the combination of learning and selection moves that
mean mature phenotype a fraction c of the way toward the optimum phenotype. The
magnitude of c is determined by the product of two factors, a, which represents the
force of guided variation alone, and S /(S + U,), which represents the effect of

selection alone. Thus, increasing the strength of learning increases the rate at which
the population approaches the optimum phenotype when the determinants of learning are culturally transmitted. This is in sharp contrast to the case of genetic
transmission where learning slows the evolution of the initial value of the learning
rule.
Comparing the change in the mean over one generation

We can now compare the adaptive consequences of cultural and genetic transmission. The recursions that were derived in the previous section show that the
magnitude of the change in the mean and variance of the distribution of initial
phenotypes in a population over one generation will depend strongly on whether the
initial value of the learning rule is transmitted genetically or culturally. These
differences will cause a cultural population to respond differently to a changing
environment than a genetic population. This, in turn, will cause the genetic fitness
of individuals with genetic transmission to differ from the genetic fitness of individuals with cultural transmission.
We begin by comparing the dynamic response of the mean of the population to
selection under the two modes of inheritance. When the determinants of learning
are genetically transmitted, increasing the effectiveness of learning (i.e. a—0)
reduces the response of the population. In contrast, when the determinants of learning are culturally transmitted, we see the opposite result. This suggests that the
force of guided variation will cause populations with cultural transmission of the

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

123

determinants of phenotype to respond more rapidly to environmental change. We
can use the results that we have already derived to show that this intuition is
generally correct.
First, notice that Recursions 4.41 and 4.43 (which give the change in the mean
Over one generation for each mode of transmission) differ only in the definition of
the constants y and c. That is, they have the same linear form:

X’ = AX +(1- MH
where

(4.44)

4 = yin the genetic case, and 4 = c in the cultural case. This tells us that

the population with genetic transmission will respond more quickly to selection
only if c > y. The relative magnitude of c and y depends on the strengths of
selection and learning and the magnitudes of the variances, Va Vewand V.. We can

determine the combinations of these parameters for which c > y if we make the
assumption that selection is weak. It is shown in Box 4.12 that c > y when
Vi/Si (1a)

ch US

(4.45)

where U, is the equilibrium variance of the mature phenotype under cultural
transmission. This condition has a very simple interpretation. U./S and V,/S are
measures of the strength of selection on culturally and genetically transmitted
variation. The parameter (1 — a) is a measure of the effectiveness of learning, and
therefore also a measure of the strength of the force of guided variation. Thus,
Inequality 4.45 says that a genetic population responds more quickly than a cultural
one whenever the effect of natural selection alone in the genetic population exceeds
the effects of the force of guided variation plus that of natural selection in the
cultural population.
The strengths of selection under the two modes of inheritance depend on the
relative magnitudes of the variances V, and U.. It is important to keep in mind that
U, is the variance in mature phenotype in a cultural population while V, is the
variance in initial phenotype in a genetic one. Using Equation 4.10 we can write
U, in terms of the equilibrium variance in the initial phenotype in a cultural
population, V.:

Usz= av. + V,(1 — ay

(4.46)

To interpret this relation, first assume that there is no learning (a = 1) and that
equilibrium variances of the initial phenotype are the same (V, = V.). In this case
the two populations respond to selection in exactly the same way because learning
has no effect on the variance of the mature phenotype. Allowing learning to become
important (so that a < 1) has two effects: Individual learning acts to decrease the
amount of variance in mature phenotypes because individuals tend to acquire
similar individual phenotypes by individual learning, but it also acts to increase the
variance because more of the errors made during learning are transmitted. Finally,
there is no reason to suppose that equilibrium variances should be equal. A variety
of factors affect the relative magnitudes of these variances. It seems likely that new
variation will be generated at a higher rate in the case of cultural transmission

124

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

ent
Box 4.12. A genetic population responds more quickly to changes in the environm
of
ions
combinat
the
find
to
want
we
Here
y.
>
c
when
n
than a cultural populatio
the
values of a, S, U-, Ve, and V, that cause this inequality to be satisfied. Using
definitions of y and c, the condition c > yy becomes

a

1+ (1 —a)’V./S

1+U./S~

1+ (1 —a)*V./S + a°V,/S

First, we expand both denominators using Taylor’s series

a(1=) U2/S

(U,/S)o—aaee )> (1 + (1 — a)? V./S)

(1— (1 — a’V. + a’ V,)/S + {(((1 — a)’Vv. + a Vi) /S) oo )
If selection is weak, S > V., Vz, U-. This means we can ignore terms of order (V./S)?,

(U./S)*, and (V,/S)?. Doing this yields the approximate expression

a(1 — U./S) > (1 — a*V,/S)

(1)

Now consider the special case when y = c. Then Expression 1 becomes the following
equality:

8g
Vo oaeal

lea We)

Sacre

ee

We can use the quadratic formula to solve for a, which yields the following expression:

a = (1/2){(1 — U./S) + [(1 — U./S)? + 4V,/S]}'7}
We expand the square root as a Taylor series and once again ignore the terms of order

(V/S)* to obtain
a = (1/2)(1 — U./S + [1 — U./S + 2V,/S))
Since the — root is always negative, only the + root is relevant. Thus

a(t 2)

Ue

(Se

eS

ee VS)

From this it is clear that c > -y when

Vi/ Si (laa)ice Us/S
because all the environmental and learning errors are inherited. However, for the

same reason more of the variation is also subject to selection in each generation than
in the genetic case. The amount of variation in the cultural population also depends
on the model of inheritance chosen. The blending model will act to reduce the
amount of variation in each generation while the multifactorial model will not.
Finally, learning itself has the effect of reducing the variability in the cultural

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

125

population. Thus, we cannot predict what the relative magnitudes of these variances (V, and V.) will be.
What is clear from 4.45, however, is that in a cultural species even very weak
learning processes can have an important impact on the rate of change of the mean
phenotype in a population. If selection is weak, we expect the ratios U./S and V,/'S
to be relatively small, on the order of a few percent. This means that learning
processes which move an individual’s phenotype only a few percent of the way
toward the optimum in a single generation can be as important as the effect of
selection on the distribution of phenotypes in a population. Learning processes that
on average have a stronger effect than this on the behavior of an organism will
generally swamp the effects of selection.

Comparing the fitness of genetic and cultural transmission in a fluctuating
environment
The cultural transmission of the mature phenotype has two main effects. First,
transmission of phenotypes modified by learning creates a force that increases the
frequency of favorable phenotypic variants. This means that a cultural population
will respond more rapidly to a changing environment. Second, the nature of the
inheritance system affects the amount of variation in the population. Differences in
the variation of the mature phenotype affect the mean fitness of the population
directly. Differences in the proportion of this variation that is transmitted also affect
the strength of selection and thus the rate at which a population responds to
changing conditions.
With the qualitative effects of cultural transmission in mind, let us now consider
when cultural transmission might be favored by natural selection in a fluctuating
environment. Assume that the environmental fluctuations are described by the
model outlined earlier in this chapter. Once again we use geometric mean fitness
as a measure of the relative advantage (or disadvantage) of cultural transmission

over genetic transmission. It can be shown that the logarithm of geometric mean
fitness of a cultural population less the logarithm of the geometric mean fitness of
a genetic population, p, is given by
< VP E{(X. it H,)’} ce VPE{(Xp = H,)*}
petit nfSSar+ U,
(4.47)
(Ue
Id(pee, wealW hg)
Ate" 6A)

where U, is the variance of mature phenotypes in the genetic population and x,
and X,, are the means in genetic and cultural population, respectively. If p > 0,
then the geometric mean fitness of a cultural population is greater than that of a
genetic population.
Initially we will assume that the equilibrium variances of initial phenotype under
the two modes of inheritance (V, and V.) are equal. When V. = Vz, it follows that

the variances of mature phenotype are equal, that is, U, = U:. This means that p
will be greater than zero whenever E{(X,, — H,)*} > E{(Xe. — H,)*}. Or, to put
it in words, if we constrain the variances to be equal, the ratio of the geometric
mean fitnesses depends only on the expected squared difference of the mean initial
phenotype and the optimum phenotype, which, in turn, depends on the rate at
which the mean initial phenotype in the population responds to environmental

126

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

fluctuations. Since the recursions for Xe and X,, have the same linear form given

in Equation 4.44, we can use Equation 4.35 to obtain these expectations by making
the substitution M = a.
What is the optimal rate of response? When we first considered this problem we
reasoned that the mode of inheritance that led to more rapid adaptation would
always be favored. Our intuition was incorrect. By differentiating the expression for
E{(X, — H,)’} given in Equation 4.35 with respect to 4, it is easy to show that there
is an optimal value of 4, s4*, that minimizes E{(X, — H,)’}:

A

(EP -*R)/2R

es {\

for R =s073

for R < 1/3

ete)

Equation 4.48 says that in weakly autocorrelated environments (R < 1/3) the
slowest possible response is favored,
= 1. For more highly correlated environments (R > 1/3) there is an optimal rate of response, 4°, which is slower than the

fastest possible response, 4 = 0. Surprisingly, this result is independent of the
magnitude of the environmental fluctuations, Vy. It is important to keep in mind that
this result assumes that the variance is held constant.
We suggest the following heuristic explanation of this interesting result. In any
generation, a population’s response is always toward the optimum in that generation. In an uncorrelated environment in which there is no statistical similarity
between the optimum phenotype in consecutive generations, a rapid response of the
mean phenotype does not improve the fit of the organism to the environment. In
fact, in an uncorrelated environment the motion of the mean phenotype is simply
arandom walk around the long-run optimum. Increasing the rate of response simply
increases the variance of this process and therefore the value of E{(X, — H,)*}. If

the optimum phenotypes in consecutive generations are correlated (so that R > 0),
movement toward the previous generation’s optimum will, on average, also be
movement toward the present generation’s optimum. This effect will tend to de-

crease E{(X, — H,)’}. Apparently these two effects balance at R = 1/3.
The rates of response of genetic and cultural populations depend on the values
of
and c, which in turn depend on the parameters a, V., V,, and Vy. Figures
4.1la—c give the combinations of values of R and a for which the logarithm of
geometric mean fitness of a genetic population exceeds that of a cultural population
by a constant amount. In each figure the magnitude of the environmental
fluctuations, Vy, is different, but the general pattern is very similar in each case.
Genetic transmission is favored for low values of R, and cultural transmission is
favored for higher values of R. The difference is most pronounced for moderately
weak learning (i.e. a = .7—.8) and large values of Vy. This reflects the fact that
increasing the strength of learning (a — 0) or decreasing environmental fluctuations (Vy — 0) increases the absolute magnitude of the geometric mean fitness of

both modes of transmission.
Next, we allow the variances of the initial phenotype to differ. In this case all
the terms in Equation 4.47 are important. The first term gives the direct effect of
the variances on the relative fitness of the two modes. Notice that this term is
positive whenever cultural transmission has a smaller variance than genetic trans-

Comparing Genetic and Cultural Transmission

127

a
Zz

Nii 10

O
=
<x
=|

uJ

o&
O
UO

CULTURE
FAVORED

=

GENES
FAVORED

O
=

ra

0

s

Gs

:

=

CULTURE. |

5
a

FAVORED:

FAVORED
;

0
Se
ee

|
LEARNING

aes

|

0

PARAMETER (a)

Fig. 4.11 A contour plot of the logarithm of the difference of the geometric mean fitnesses
of populations with cultural and genetic transmission as a function of environmental
autocorrelation (R) and the relative importance of cultural transmission (a) for three
amounts of environmental variability (measured by Vi). Unshaded areas represent parameter combinations for which genetic transmission is favored, and shaded areas indicate
situations in which cultural transmission is favored. In this figure V.= V, = 0.1, S = 1.0,
and V. = 0.1. Note that at very high autocorrelations genes become favored again in all

cases, though this effect shows up poorly in the figure.

mission and negative when the reverse is true. The second two terms give the effect
of the response of the population discussed above. To deduce the relative importance of these effects, in Figures 4.12a—c we have plotted contours of constant
p under the assumption that the variance in the cultural population is ten times that
in the genetic population (V. = 10V,). In Figures 4.13a—c it is assumed that the
variance in the genetic population is ten times larger than that in the cultural
population. From these figures we conclude that the direct effect is important only
when the amount of environmental variation is small.

128

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

as

Vy=10

,

O
Ee

<q

es
a

2 XGENES.
“FAVORED

Oo
O

=

=

CULTURE
>“ FAVORED

i

GENES
FAVORED

"|

<x
re

Zz
uw

=

(.

=

CULTUREA

a

FAVORED

O

=
=

VE,

GENES
FAVORED

VH=.|

LE)

LEARNING

0
PARAMETER
(a)

Fig. 4.12 The same as 4.11 except that V, = 0.01. That is, it gives a contour plot of the
logarithm of the difference of the geometric mean fitnesses of populations with cultural and
genetic transmission as a function of environmental autocorrelation (R) and the relative

importance of cultural transmission (a) for three amounts of environmental variability
(measured by Vy). In this figure V. = 0.1, V, = 0.01,
genetic transmission is favored, when R is near one.

S = 1.0, and V. = 0.1. Again,

Conclusion

At the beginning of this chapter we posed the following question: Can a system of
social learning which requires individuals to ignore the dictates of individual
learning be favored by natural selection? We began our investigation of this question by reviewing models of learning drawn from the social sciences. These models
are all very similar—in each case learning is portrayed as a process that modifies
some initial phenotype according to some guiding criteria. It is reasonable to expect
that, on average, learning will usually increase an individual’s adaptation to its
environment, but for any particular individual, learning can lead to errors. Each
newborn individual must inherit its initial phenotype, either genetically or culturally through the processes of social learning.

Conclusion

129

CULTURE
FAVORED

ENVIRONMENTAL
AUTOCORRELATION
(R)

|
LEARNING

0
PARAMETER (a)

Fig. 4.13 The same as 4.11 except that V. = 0.01. That is, it gives a contour plot of the
logarithm of the difference of the geometric mean fitnesses of populations with cultural and
genetic transmission as a function of environmental autocorrelation (R) and the relative

importance of cultural transmission (a) for three amounts of environmental variability
(measured

by Vy). In this figure V. = 0.01, V, = 0.1,

S = 1.0, and V. = 0.1. Here

cultural transmission is favored near R = 1 because the genetic variance, V,, is assumed
to be greater than the cultural variance, V..

We first considered the dynamics of a population in which phenotypes modified
by learning were culturally transmitted. In such a population the interaction of
cultural transmission and learning creates forces which affect both the mean and the
variance of the initial phenotypes in the population. The cultural transmission of
such guided variation creates a force which increases the frequency of variants
which are favored by learning. If individual learning is important in determining
mature phenotypes compared to cultural transmission, then the force affecting the
mean is strong and the population mean moves to the phenotypic value favored by
learning in a short time. When this is the case, however, most of the errors made

during individual learning affect behavior, and therefore the variance in the population is substantial. When cultural transmission is more important in determining

130

Guided Variation and the Evolution of Cultural Inheritance

individual behavior, the mean approaches the optimum more slowly, but less error
variation is introduced each generation.
We then supposed that the parameter L, which determined the relative importance of culture and individual learning in determining individual behavior, was
under genetic control and asked what value of L is favored by natural selection. We
showed that in both a heterogeneous and a fluctuating environment small values of
L (meaning that culture is much more important than learning) were favored if (1)
social learning is more accurate than individual learning, (2) individual learning is
costly and therefore inaccurate, and (3) environmental variability is predictable.
When these conditions hold, the model suggests that natural selection will lead to a

system of social learning with the properties of an inheritance system, even though
such a system causes individuals to ignore the dictates of individual learning.
Predictable environments and inaccurate learning would also seem to favor
genetic transmission. To determine the circumstances under which cultural transmission is a superior mode of adaptation to genetic transmission, we considered the
case in which the initial phenotype was genetically inherited. We then compared
the dynamics of cultural and genetic populations in a fluctuating environment.
Because the cultural population is affected by both the forces of selection and
guided variation, it responds more rapidly to environmental fluctuations than does
the genetic population. However, cultural transmission also affects the variance of
the trait in a complicated way. Using these results we compared the geometric mean
fitness of genetic and cultural populations in a temporally fluctuating environment.
From this comparison we concluded that cultural transmission is most likely to be
favored when (1) environmental fluctuations are large and at least moderately
autocorrelated and (2) learning makes only modest improvements in the phenotype
of any individual during any generation.
Why is culture so rare in animals?

The model described in this chapter predicts in a very general way the kinds of
conditions that are likely to favor the origin of a system of cultural transmission.
In evolutionary biology such predictions are typically evaluated using the method
of comparative natural history. To apply this method to the question at hand we
would collect as much evidence as possible about the ecology and behavior of a
number of closely related species that varied in the extent to which phenotypic traits
were culturally transmitted. If we found that cultural transmission was most common in species living in habitats that fit the predictions of the model, then we could
reasonably infer that the model had some basis in reality.
The difficulty with this approach is that cultural transmission seems to be
extremely rare in nature, and where it does exist it is apparently confined to a very
narrow range of traits. The literature on cultural transmission in nonhuman animals
has been reviewed extensively by Immelman (1975), Wilson (1975), Galef (1976),

Bonner (1980), and Mainardi (1980). These authors report a large number of
instances of very simple kinds of cultural transmission in nature. There are, for

example, many examples of habitat imprinting and the inheritance of song dialects
in birds. However, there are very few examples of species in which complex novel
behavior patterns have been shown to be culturally transmitted.

Conclusion

131

There are at least two possible explanations for the limited occurrence of complex forms of cultural transmission among other animal species. The first is that
complex cultural forms of transmission are actually more common than the limited
number of published examples would lead us to believe. This may be due in part
to the difficulty of distinguishing the cultural and genetic components of any
behavioral trait. Moreover, since examples of complex cultural transmission are so
rare, it is usually assumed that most behaviors are transmitted genetically or learned
de novo. Hence, the burden of demonstrating cultural transmission falls on the
investigator. Given these problems it is plausible that there are many more examples of cultural transmission than has been realized.
It is also possible, however, that complex forms of cultural transmission are

genuinely rare in nature. If so, this is an interesting and curious occurrence. The
results of our model suggest that cultural transmission should be favored over
genetic transmission under a fairly wide range of circumstances. The fact that
cultural transmission is not common suggests that some additional explanation is
required. One possibility is that some rare preadaptation is necessary in order for
culture to evolve (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 325-331). Given that rudimentary
forms of culture are common, this does not seem likely. Another possibility is that

there are other costs associated with cultural transmission that we have not taken
into account so far. As we shall see in subsequent chapters, this explanation is very
plausible.

5
Biased Transmission

and the Sociobiology Debate
The universal ideas do not exist everywhere
vary. ...[T]hese

variations

are

in identical form, but they

either external,

that is founded on the

environment . . . or internal, that is founded on psychological conditions.
The effects of psychical factors are also being studied. . . . Inquiries into the
mutual relations of tribes and peoples begin to show that certain cultural
elements are easily assimilated while others are rejected.
Franz Boas, Race, Language and Culture (1940: 271, 272)

Donald Campbell (1960) has suggested that all learning processes are analogous to
the process of natural selection. Consider, for example, trial-and-error learning:
individuals generate behavioral variants, try them out, and then select the best
variants according to some standard of merit. Social learning can also be analogous
to natural selection. The same sense of pleasure and pain that allows individuals to
select among the variants that are generated as part of trial-and-error learning also
allows selection among preexisting cultural variants. Similarly, the more elaborate
cognitive processes whereby people plan and invent new behaviors can also act to
discriminate among preexisting ones. If individuals are predisposed to adopt some
variants, then these favored variants will increase in frequency. We term this
process “biased transmission.” A number of theorists have proposed that the evolutionary forces that result from biased transmission play a dominant role in cultural
evolution (Ruyle, 1973; Durham, 1976; Boehm, 1978; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1981; Lumsden and Wilson, 1981). Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman and Lums-

den and Wilson analyze evolutionary models of biased cultural transmission under
the rubrics of “cultural selection” and “epigenetic rules,” respectively.
We believe that the role of biased cultural transmission in human evolution is
crucial in the human sociobiology debate. Many authors have argued that sociobiology fails as a theory of human behavior because it does not account for the fact
that humans rationally choose their behavior. Even Marshall Sahlins (1976b) and
Marvin Harris (1979), who concur on little else, agree that it is through the
invention of cultural variants and the choice among existing ones that genetic
imperatives are transcended. In our terminology, these authors are arguing that
human behavior cannot be predicted by sociobiological theory because the forces
of guided variation and biased transmission dominate cultural evolution.
132

An Overview of Biased Transmission

133

Whether this view is correct depends on the origin and strength of the forces of
guided variation and biased transmission. If panhuman, genetically transmitted
rules allow humans to choose fitness-maximizing cultural variants in many habitats,
as Alexander suggests (1979a: Chap. 2), or if epigenetic rules can respond to
selection in particular local habitats, as Lumsden and Wilson argue, then bias and
guided variation will create strong forces favoring the evolution of cultural variants
which enhance reproductive success. If such genetically transmitted rules cannot
readily evolve, then other forces may predominate

in cultural evolution, forces

which do not necessarily act to maximize genetic fitness.
In this chapter, we have two aims. First, we want to consider the evolutionary
properties of biased cultural transmission. We begin by defining biased transmission in general and developing a taxonomy of different kinds of biased transmission. Then we develop models of the simplest type of biased transmission,
direct bias. Finally, we consider models in which the strength and direction of
direct bias are genetically controlled, and we attempt to use these models to
understand how direct bias might evolve. From these models we conclude that
genetically transmitted biases can evolve if (1) they are not too costly and (2) they
increase the chances of acquiring locally favored cultural variants in a wide variety
of habitats. However, the evolution of habitat-specific biases appears much less
likely.
Our second aim is to reconsider the sociobiology controversy in the light of the
concepts presented in this chapter and the preceding one. Our models suggest that
two unresolved issues are at the crux of the controversy:
1. How much choosing do people actually do in the course of acquiring or
transmitting their cultural repertoire? How strong are direct biases relative to other
evolutionary forces acting on cultural variation?
2. Where do the rules that direct choice (including cognitive structures, senses
of pleasure and pain, and objectives of rational calculation) come from and how do
they work?

If biased transmission and guided variation are strong forces closely controlled by
genes, then a sociobiological hypothesis seems plausible. If biased transmission
and guided variation are typically weak, or if their direction is determined by other
forces of cultural evolution, then other hypotheses are possible. We conclude our
discussion with a review of some empirical evidence relevant to these questions.
Our conclusion is that this evidence is consistent with the following interpretation:
strong general biases that favor genetically advantageous cultural variants may
govern the evolution of some traits, but for others biases seem to have only a weak
influence. For this latter important class of traits, other forces need to be considered.
An Overview of Biased Transmission

An analogy with statistics
We saw in Chapter 3 that although linear cultural transmission may affect the
amount of variation of a trait in a population, it produces no evolutionary forces

134.

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

affecting the mean of the trait. It is useful to consider linear cultural transmission
as analogous to statistical estimation. Each naive individual is exposed to a sample
of the cultural variants present in the population, those variants that characterize his
set of cultural parents. If we assume that sets of cultural parents are formed at
random, then each such set of cultural variants constitutes an unbiased sample of
the population. (This is not an unduly restrictive assumption; it means that we are
defining changes in the distribution of variants in the population due to selective
formation of sets of cultural parents as a form of natural selection. Such changes
are analyzed in the next chapter.) The cultural variant acquired by each naive
individual can be thought of as an estimate of the average value of the cultural trait
in the population based on the sample to which that individual was exposed. To
make this analogy more concrete, consider the case of vertical and oblique transmission of a quantitative character via the blending rule. This transmission rule is
analogous to a weighted average of the (unbiased) sample, and as such it is an
unbiased estimator of the mean value of the character among the pool of parents.
Transmission, by itself, will lead to evolutionary forces only when an offspring
is disproportionately likely to acquire some variants, that is, when the cultural
transmission rule is analogous to a biased estimator. When this is the case, we say
that the transmission rule is biased. In the next section we sketch a taxonomy of
biased cultural transmission and consider why the various kinds of bias might make
adaptive sense.
Three types of biased transmission
It is useful to think of biased transmission as arising from the attempts of offspring
to evaluate the adaptiveness (that is, their effects on genetic fitness) of the different
cultural variants to which they are exposed. This is not to say that all, or even most,
biases are necessarily adaptive, especially in contemporary societies. However,
thinking about biases in this way enables us to generate predictions concerning
which kinds of biases might be widely observed, predictions which then can be
tested empirically.
Suppose that individuals are exposed to several different variants of a particular
trait. Further suppose that some evolutionary force, such as the force of guided
variation, has acted to increase the frequency of adaptive variants and reduce the
frequency of maladaptive ones. Given these assumptions, the locally adaptive
variants will also be the most common variants, and, therefore, a naive individual

who simply picks a model at random and adopts his or her cultural variant would
have a probability equal to the frequency of the variant of behaving in the locally
adaptive manner. As we saw in the last chapter, such unbiased cultural transmission
can be genetically adaptive.
It seems plausible, however, that a naive individual might increase its chances

of acquiring the most adaptive variant by using some procedure to evaluate the
cultural variants to which he or she is exposed. There are undoubtedly many
different ways that this might be done. However, we believe that the three general
classes of mechanisms are likely to be important in human cultural transmission.
Each results in a different kind of biased transmission which we label “direct bias,”

An Overview of Biased Transmission

135

“indirect bias,” and “frequency-dependent bias.” The following simple example
illustrates the differences among these three kinds of biased transmission.
Suppose that a child is learning to play ping-pong by observing the play of
several adult models and that there are two different ways to grasp a ping-pong
paddle—the “pencil grip” and the “racquet grip.” Once a player has adopted one
grip, it is unusual to switch. Suppose each of the grips is used by at least one of
the models. How might the child choose which grip to adopt? One way would be
to randomly (with respect to grip) choose one model as a “role model” and copy
his or her grip. For example, the child might imitate a parent. This would lead to
unbiased transmission. The other answers to this question correspond to the different classes of biased transmission.

Direct bias. One way would be to try both kinds of grip and see which one seemed
to work best. This is an example of direct bias. In general, we will say that a cultural
transmission rule is characterized by direct bias if one cultural variant is simply
more attractive than others. The direction of the bias need not be the same for all
individuals; individuals with large hands or access to expensive paddles might
prefer one grip while individuals with small hands or cheap paddles prefer the
other. The problem with this method of evaluating the different grips is that it might
take a lot of practice with a grip to become proficient enough to evaluate it. A fair
test of both grips might occupy time that could be better spent perfecting one grip,
especially if one has to be a fairly expert player before accurate judgments are
possible.
Indirect bias. A second method of evaluating the grips would be to choose the grip
used by the model who is the most successful ping-pong player. This is an example
of indirect bias. In general, indirect bias results if offspring use the value of a
second character that characterizes a model (e.g. success at ping-pong) to determine the attractiveness of that individual as model for the primary character (e.g.
mode of gripping the paddle). This method of evaluating which grip to use is likely
to be much less costly than directly evaluating both grips. It may also be less
reliable. The best ping-pong player among the set of cultural parents may use the
inferior grip and excel anyway because of some other factor such as reflex speed
or strategic ability. Or it might be that the best player’s grip is best for him, but that
it is not best for a given child because they differ in some way.

Frequency-dependent bias. Another method of choosing between the two grips
would be to pick the one used by most of the models. This is an example of
frequency-dependent bias. In general, frequency-dependent bias will occur if the
probability that offspring acquires a variant depends nonlinearly on the frequency
of the variant among the set of cultural parents. Once again this method of judging
the merit of different grips is much less time consuming than evaluating them
directly. However, it will be a good method only if some process, like guided
variation, ensures that the best grip is the most common.
Each of these three kinds of biased transmission can be thought of as resulting
from attempts by naive individuals to evaluate the cultural variants to which they

136

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

In
are exposed in a setting in which information is incomplete or costly to acquire.
evalufor
es
procedur
this chapter we focus on directly biased transmission. Most
ating which behaviors are adaptive in a wide range of habitats are likely to entail
,
some kind of experimentation. As long as this experimentation is not too expensive
there
see,
shall
we
As
it is plausible that directly biased transmission might evolve.
is abundant empirical evidence that direct bias exists. When it is difficult or costly
to evaluate the consequences of the variants available in the population directly,
then indirect or frequency-dependent bias may be more advantageous. We will see
in Chapters 7 and 8 that these modes of evaluation can be effective without any
direct evaluation of the adaptive merits of the different variants and that empirical
evidence suggests they are significant factors in human cultural transmission.
Comparing directly biased transmission and guided variation
The forces of directly biased cultural transmission and guided variation are similar
because they both depend on “guiding criteria” for their direction. Recall that the
force of guided variation results from the cultural transmission of behavior as
modified by learning, where learning is taken to include the whole range of processes from simple conditioning to cognitively complex rational calculation. We
argued that all of these processes require a guiding criterion that specifies the merit
of different alternatives. Directly biased transmission is similar, except that now
individuals select from among the alternative cultural variants that have been
modeled for them rather than choosing among self-generated alternatives. In both
cases, the guiding criteria allow the individual to rank the various alternatives. As
in the case of simple kinds of learning such as operant conditioning, this selection
process can be unconscious. As with guided variation, the guiding criteria that
shape the direction of the directly biased transmission could be inherited genetically
or culturally or learned independently.
One might sensibly ask, Is directly biased transmission of any use to an individual if it is so similar to guided variation? One answer is that the two processes are
not mutually exclusive. The same cognitive apparatus used for ordinary learning
could be equally well applied to sorting among culturally presented alternatives. A
second answer is that it may be easier to sort among existing alternatives than to
invent new ones. It seems intuitive that in most situations the search for alternatives
is more costly than the evaluation of behaviors that have already been discovered.
In such situations directly biased transmission can be effective even when ordinary
learning is too costly to be significant in the determination of behavior.
Despite their fundamental similarity, the transmission of guided variation and
directly biased transmission have different population-level consequences. The
force of directly biased transmission depends on the existence of variability in the
population. Naive individuals choose only from among the variants to which they
are exposed. If they are exposed to only one variant, directly biased transmission
can have no effect. If there is little variability in a population, most sets of parents
will contain only one variant and the force that results from direct bias will be weak.
In contrast, guided variation involves selection among internally generated alternatives. This process does not depend on the cultural repertoire of other individuals

Models of Direct Bias

137

in the population. Thus the magnitude of the force of guided variation is independent of the amount of cultural variability in the population (see Eq. 4.11).
Models of Direct Bias

In this section we describe two classes of models of cultural transmission with
direct bias, one based on the transmission of a dichotomous character and the
second on the transmission of a quantitative character. Both of these models show
how directly biased cultural transmission can increase the frequency of the culturally transmitted variants that are favored by the bias. Like natural selection, the
magnitude of the force caused by directly biased transmission depends on the
amount of variability in the population. In the subsequent section we consider the
adaptive consequences of directly biased transmission.
A model of directly biased transmission of a dichotomous character
In this section, we modify the linear transmission rule discussed in Chapter 3 so that

it allows for the possibility of direct bias. We begin with the simplest possible
version of the model. Suppose that (1) there are two cultural variants, c and d, (2)
cultural transmission is vertical, (3) there are two parents, and (4) both parents have

equal weight in the transmission process. With these assumptions the linear transmission rule takes the form shown in Table 5.1. In Table 5.2 the linear rule has been
modified by introducing a new parameter, B, which represents the effect of directly
biased transmission. Notice that if B = 0, this rule reduces to a linear rule. If
B > 0, then offspring who are exposed to cultural parents with different cultural
variants will be more likely to acquire variant c than variant d. When B > 0 we say

Table 5.1 Rule for linear transmission with two models of equal weight
Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant

Variant of
Model 1

Variant of
Model 2

c

d

Cc
Cc

Cc
d

1
1/2

0
2

d

c

2

(V)

d

d

0

1

Table 5.2 Rule for directly biased transmission with two models
Variant of
Model 1

Variant of
Model 2

©

c

c
d

d
c

d

d

Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant
Cc

d

1

0
lens

0

1

5(1+B) —5(1-B)
1
melas
eg es
Gales)
1

138

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

that the transmission rule is biased in favor of variant c, and when B < 0 we say
that transmission is biased in favor of d. Since the probabilities that an offspring
acquires c and d must sum to one, it follows thatO0 = B = Li
To deduce the effect of biased transmission on the frequency of the two variants
in the population, we proceed exactly as we did in Chapter 3. Suppose that the
frequency of variant c before transmission in a particular generation is p and that
sets of cultural parents are formed at random. Then the frequency of p after
transmission, p’, is found by computing the frequency of each different set of
cultural parents, multiplying this times the probability that a particular set of
cultural parents results in an offspring with a particular cultural variant, and then
summing over all possible sets of cultural parents. In the case of two parents,

p’ = pl) + p(l — p)(1/2)(1 + B) + (1 — p)pdi/2)(1 + B)

3.1)

which can be simplified to become

Ph

Bp ep)

(5.2)

Equation 5.2 says that if B > 0 transmission will increase the frequency of
variant c. This means that directly biased transmission creates a force that increases
the frequency of the culturally transmitted variant that is favored by the bias. The
magnitude of this force depends on the variance of the character in the population,
p(1 — p), and on the strength of the bias measured by the parameter B. The
magnitude of the variance is important because the strength of the force caused by
directly biased transmission depends on the probability that sets of parents with
different cultural variants are formed. If one variant is very common, then most sets

of cultural parents are characterized by the same variant. These transmission events
have no effect on the frequency of the different variants in the population because
directly biased transmission can only be effective if the offspring is exposed to
parents with different cultural variants. In Equation 5.2 this condition is represented
by the fact that the quantity p(1 — p) approaches zero as p approaches one or zero.
The model also suggests that directly biased transmission has the property that
relatively weak biases can have important effects on the frequency of different
cultural variants in a population. The parameter B measures the extent to which a
particular transmission event is biased. Equation 5.2 shows that small values of B
can lead to relatively rapid change in the frequency of cultural variants in a
population. For example, suppose that B = 0.1. This means that in 20 offspring
exposed to one model with variant c and another with variant d, we would expect
11 offspring with variant c and 9 with variant d. To detect biases of this magnitude
reliably would require the observation of a fairly large number of transmission
events. As is shown in Figure 5.1, however, a bias of 0.1 can cause a rare variant
to increase to high frequency in a few tens of generations. This property of cultural
transmission is very important in the context of both the nature-nurture question and
the sociobiology controversy because it means that weak, hard to measure, genetically transmitted biases can have large effects.

Models of Direct Bias

139

Oo

N

50

&

FREQUENCY
VARIANT
FAVORED
OF
BIAS
BY

100

GENERATIONS

Fig. 5.1 The time path of the frequency of a cultural variant favored by directly biased
transmission. The initial frequency of the favored variant is 0.1 and the bias parameter, B,
is also 0.1.

A more complicated model
In many cases of interest, cultural traits are transmitted horizontally among peers.
As we saw in Chapter 3, this requires a modification of the model to allow for the
possibility that different cultural parents have different weights. In this section we
will modify the model of directly biased transmission to allow for this possibility.
We will see that there is an interesting interaction between unequal transmission by
different parents and directly biased transmission.
In Chapter 3 we modeled horizontal transmission of a dichotomous trait as
follows: Suppose that the frequency of trait c in the population is p. Then, each
individual encounters n — 1 other potential models. The probability of encountering models characterized by a particular cultural variant will depend on the
frequency of that variant in the population and perhaps on other factors as well.
After encountering the n — 1 models, each individual then either retains his or her
initial cultural variant or adopts the cultural variant of one of the models. Recall that
in order to express the transmission rule algebraically we denoted the cultural
variant of each model by a numerical value, X;, where X; = | if the ith model was
characterized by the variant c and X; = 0 if the ith model had the variant d. With

these assumptions the probability that a particular individual is characterized by
variant c after cultural transmission given that he was X; and was exposed to
cultural parents with variants X2,. . .,X, is given by
Prob(c|X,,.

4 eX)

a

SAK
i=1

(Or)

140

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

According to 5.3, each individual has a probability of A, of retaining its initial
cultural variant and a probability of A; of adopting that of the ith model. Such a rule
causes no change in the distribution of cultural variants in a population (see the
discussion in Chap. 3 on vertical transmission).
The essence of directly biased transmission is that the probability that a particular model is imitated should depend on whether the model is characterized by
variant c or variant d. This means that the weight of the ith model should be a
function of X;. One simple way of doing this is as follows: let the function B(X;)
be defined

Brio
ECO) ie ox

1
0

Then we can define the importance of the ith model, Aj, with X;:

ai(1 + B(X))
j=1 0 C1 + BCX)

NS

(5.4)

Equation 5.4 says that the ith model has a “basic” weight, a;. As argued in Chapter
3, these values may be different if some kinds of models are more salient than
others. This basic weight is increased by a factor 1 + B if the ith model is
characterized by variant c (assuming B > Q) and decreased by a factor 1 — B if the
ith model is characterized by variant d. Finally, the weights are normalized by the
denominator so that A; gives the weight of the ith model relative to the other models
encountered by the individual in question.
This model is not easy to solve for all values of B and n. In this section we
consider the case in which individuals potentially change their cultural variant after
each encounter with a potential model, which corresponds to n = 2. In the next
section we will analyze a very similar model assuming a quantitative character for
arbitrary n but small values of B. Suppose that the frequency of c before an episode
of horizontal transmission is p. If we assume that each individual encounters a
model with cultural variant c with probability equal to p, then the frequency of
variant c after transmission, p’, is given by

B=

mete

Pe

is

ee

a,(1

+

B)

a,(1

D(; 7B (ayo)

+

B)

eaten =|

22)

where a, is the basic weight the individual places on his own previous cultural
variant and a is the weight of the model. Using the fact that a; + a =

1, it can

be shown that Equation 5.5 can be simplified to become
r
p

4Ba,a>
p

p(

(; ce B(ay

es =

(5.6)

This result is qualitatively similar to Equation 5.2. As before, directly biased
transmission creates a force that always increases the frequency of the variant that
is favored by the bias. As in Equation 5.2, the magnitude of this force depends on
the variance of c in the population and the magnitude of B. However, the relative
importance of the model, a, and the ego, a, in horizontal transmission now

Models of Direct Bias

141

affects the strength of the force of directly biased transmission. If the ego and the
model are equally important (i.e. a; = a) = 4), then Equation 5.6 reduces to
Equation 5.2, as one would expect. However, if their weights are unequal, the
magnitude of the force increasing the favored variant is always decreased. This
effect is most important when B is small. This means that the force of direct bias
is strongest when the variance within sets of parents is large.
Direct bias and quantitative characters
Chapter 3 includes discussions of two models of the cultural transmission of a
quantitative character, a blending model and a multifactorial model. Both of these

models have the property that cultural transmission by itself does not change the
mean value of the character in the population. Transmission did affect the variance
of the character in the population in both of the models, but in very different ways.
In this section we modify the blending model so that it allows for the possibility of
direct bias. We only analyze the effect of directly biased transmission on the mean.
It can be shown that the effect of direct bias on the mean in the multifactorial model
of quantitative inheritance is exactly the same as in the blending model.
Once again, suppose that cultural transmission is horizontal, and an individual
(ego) who has the cultural variant X; encounters n — | other individuals (models)
with variants X;. Based on the observed behavior of the ith, Y,, model, ego forms
an estimate of his or her cultural variant, labeled Z;. As in Chapter 3, we assume

that
(ht

Ge S

(32)

where e; is a normally distributed random variable with mean zero and variance E;
that represents the fact that a naive individual’s estimate of the model’s cultural rule
may diverge from the inherited cultural rule of the model because of (1) environmental effects on the model’s phenotype, (2) random variation of particular model
performances, or (3) estimation errors by the naive individual. Here we consider
only the special case in which the e; are independent and have the same variance
(i.e. E, = E; = E). According to the blending model, the ego’s cultural rule after
transmission will be

Xi = SAZ;

(5.8)

i=1

We introduce direct bias into this model in the same way as we did for the case

of a dichotomous character. First we define a bias function B(Z;) that measures the

extent to which different cultural variants are perceived as attractive. We then

define the importance of the ith parent, Ai, exactly as in Equation 5.4, that is,

Ai =

a (1 + B(Zi))
2-104(1 + B(Z))

(5.9)

In principle the distribution of cultural variants after transmission can then be
d
calculated using Equation 3.22. However, in practice the fact that the right-han
the
simplify
To
side of 5.9 is a nonlinear function of Z; makes this task difficult.

142

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

analysis we will assume that the biases are relatively weak. This means that the
change in the distribution of cultural variants due to any single episode of cultural
transmission is small. This assumption is represented mathematically by assuming

that the bias function, B(Z;), is small compared to the value one for all possible
values of Z;.

can be shown that the mean value of X after the episode
With this assumption it
of cultural transmission, X’, is given by

X’ =X + [1 — 1/n,]Var(Z) E{Reg(Z,B(Z))}

(5.10)

where
n

Ds ye
i=1

and E{Reg(Z,B(Z))} is the regression of the bias function B(Z) on Z averaged over
all possible sets of models. This regression measures the extent to which a change
in phenotypic value affects the probability of transmission. For example, if
E{Reg(Z,B(Z))} is positive, models with larger values of Z are on average more
likely to be imitated. The greater the absolute value of E{Reg(Z,B(Z))} the greater

the effect. It is important to realize that both the sign and the magnitude of
E{Reg(Z,8(Z))} may depend on the distribution of Z..To see why this is so,
consider Figure 5.2. In part a, the mean cultural variant in the population is smaller
than Z”, the value which maximizes B(- ). In this case larger values of Z are favored
by biased transmission and, therefore, E{Reg(Z,8(Z))} > 0. On the other hand, if

the mean cultural variant in the population is larger than Z’, E{Reg(Z,8(Z))} is less
than zero.
Equation 5.10 also shows that the change in the mean of a quantitative character
due to the effect of directly biased transmission has the same qualitative properties
as the model which assumed a dichotomous character. The magnitude of the force
depends on the variance of the character in the population, Var(Z). All other things
being equal, the larger the variance of the character the stronger the effect of
directly biased transmission. The magnitude of the force also depends on the
number of models (n) and the disparities in their weights. The term (2;_ ,«?) can

be thought of as representing the “effective” number of cultural parents, n,. If all
parents have the same weighting, then n, = n. If parents have unequal weightings,
nm, <n.

This definition of the cultural transmission rule requires that B(Z;) be chosen so
that 1 + B(Z;) is greater than zero for all possible values of Z;. One plausible form
of B(-) that satisfies this condition is a Gaussian bias function

B(Z;) = b exp[—(Z, — Z°/2I]

(5.11)

where b < 1. Equation 5.11 says that, given a choice between cultural parents with
different variants, naive individuals will tend to imitate the cultural parent whose

observed behavior is closest to the value Z*. We will say that Z” is the cultural
variant favored by direct bias. The strength of this effect is measured by J its

Models of Direct Bias

(a)

143

REGRESSION OF (Z)
ONZ

~~

B(Z)

ze
(b)

REGRESSION OFB(Z)

x

ON Z

B(Z)

Z

ie

t

Z

ra
Fig. 5.2 Illustrates that the sign and the magnitude of the force of directly biased transmission acting on a quantitative character is proportional to the expected regression of the
bias function on the character. In (a) the mean value of the character Z is less than the
maximum of the bias function B(Z), and therefore bias acts to increase the mean value of
the character. In (b) the mean value of the character in the population is greater than the
maximum of the bias function, and therefore bias acts to decrease the mean value of the

character.

small, then small differences in the value of Z can have a large effect on the
probability that a model is imitated. If J is large, then differences in observed
behavior among models will have only a small effect on the probability that they
are imitated.
With this assumption it is shown in Box 5.1 that the mean after biased transmission, X’, is given by

X' = X + b(X)

(5.12)

where

st = bl — vn
b(X)

(V + EZ - X) ls Unset

ae

aed
Scr

+E+ 5) exp sry"Te 5 iy

The function b(-) gives the magnitude of the change in the mean cultural variant
due to biased transmission and has the form shown in Figure 5.3. This figure
indicates that if no other forces are operating on the population, the population will
reach a stable equilibrium with a mean equal to Z’, the cultural variant that is
favored by biased transmission. Notice, however, that the magnitude of the force
due to biased transmission first increases as the mean of the population is displaced
from Z" and then decreases. Thus, if a sudden environmental change caused the

144

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

Box 5.1 From Equation 5.10 we have

X’ =X + [1 + 1/n.[E{BZ)Z} — EZEBZ}
Using Equation 5.11 and result 1 from Box 4.3, we can calculate the two expected
values

E{B(Z)Z} = [(K + )B(X + e)P(X)N(e)dX de
_

J

(55)

OARS

E A) exp HR)

Vip
E ine) Wane)

XE{@(Z)} = X |B(X + e)P(X)N(e)dX de

=(__
J
a
=(X
= 2")
. (5 Eo ) ox =aEt =)
where N(*) is a normal density function with mean zero and variance E.

population to be very distant from the equilibrium, the force restoring the population to equilibrium would be very weak. On the other hand, biased transmission

would cause the population to track small changes in the environment accurately.
An aside: Biased modeling
So far in this chapter we have assumed that biased transmission results from
conscious or unconscious choices made by an individual in the process of acquiring
a cultural trait. Biased transmission could also result from choices made by the
cultural parents about which variants to model for their cultural offspring. Consider
a hypothetical example in which the trait of driving habits is culturally transmitted.
Suppose that there are two variants: some individuals like to drive recklessly, while
others do not. Naive individuals acquire the variant of liking to drive recklessly
through observation of models driving recklessly. Further suppose that everyone in

ly

L

Fig. 5.3 The change during one generation in the mean of a quantitative character, b(X),
transmitted according to a directly biased cultural transmission rule, assuming a Gaussian bias
function with a maximum at Z*.

Models of Direct Bias

145

the population believes that reckless driving is dangerous but that the individuals
who like to drive recklessly drive that way anyway. It seems plausible that the
reckless drivers might want to avoid transmitting their driving habits to their
offspring. They could do this by refraining from driving recklessly in the presence
of their offspring, that is, by biasing their modeling. In general, we refer to any
process in which experienced individuals selectively model different cultural variants as biased modeling.
Biased modeling results in a force that is similar to the force of guided variation.
To see this consider the following simple model. Each offspring is exposed to two
models who are characterized by one of two cultural variants, r for reckless and c
for careful. Table 5.3 gives the linear transmission rule modified to represent the
possibility of biased modeling. The parameters A, and A) give the weights of the
two parents. The parameter % (for dissemble) gives the probability that a reckless
parent will bias his or her behavior so that the offspring do not observe the reckless
behavior. If nonselective mating is assumed, it is easy to show (see Box 5.2) that

if p is the frequency of reckless individuals before transmission, then the frequency
after transmission, p’, is given by

pi
Unlike

(ll e2))p

(5.13)

the force due to directly biased transmission,

the force due to biased

modeling does not depend on the amount of variability in the population, and in this
way it is similar to guided variation. This is reasonable because from the point of
view of the transmission process it is as if the parent had belatedly learned not to
be reckless. Biased modeling will have different properties than guided variation
if selection continues to act on the population, because selection will still be based
on the phenotype that individuals inherited, not the one they model for their
offspring.
Although it is possible to conceive of other kinds of biased teaching and modeling (Pulliam, 1983), we will not treat these in any detail in this or other chapters.
We have chosen to do this simply because we must economize—the universe of
potential models is far too large to exhaust. We believe that biased modeling and
related processes will have properties that are very similar to those of guided
variation and the various kinds of biased transmission with which we will deal.
However, until such models are analyzed we cannot be sure. We can say, however,
that empirical evidence suggests that the processes we have chosen to model are
common, and the models indicate that ihese processes have novel and interesting
dynamic properties.

Table 5.3 Transmission rule for an example of biased modeling
Watiant of

Vanantot

Parent 1

Parent 2

ted
Tay
te)
Cah

te
Ae)
Lob
Leh

Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant
r

Cc

1D

D

Ai(1-9)

AotAyD

A1-@)

AitA®D

0

1

146

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

the
Box 5.2 Suppose that sets of cultural parents are formed at random. If p is
the
then
on,
transmissi
cultural
before
variant
cultural
“reckless”
the
of
frequency
frequency after transmission, p’, is
p=

Dida)

ple

pyAi(

=)

(1 — p)pA.(1 — D)

= (1 — B){p? + p(1 — p)(Ai + Aa)}
= (1 — D)p
Reprise

The three models of directly biased transmission analyzed in this section have
several important qualitative properties in common:
1. Directly biased transmission creates a force that increases the frequency of
the cultural variants that are favored by bias during the transmission process.
2. The magnitude of the force due to directly biased transmission depends on
the amount of cultural variability that exists in the population. All other things
being equal, the more variable the population, the greater the force.
3. Relatively weak biases that would be difficult to detect empirically can lead
to rapid change in the frequency of different variants in the population, particularly
when transmission has an important horizontal component.
4. A comparison of the models indicates that if one ignores the difference in
generation time, vertical and horizontal transmission have very similar properties.
The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias
Bias is a derived force; to understand the evolution of a trait that is influenced by
direct bias, we need to understand why cultural transmission has itself evolved to
be biased in a particular way. Suppose that a particular cultural variant is common
in a population. Further suppose that after some research we determine that it
predominates as a result of the force of direct bias. At this point we might understand the dynamic processes that maintain the variant at high frequency, but we do
not know why it is this variant and not some other that is favored by bias. To
understand fully the evolution of the trait, we must also know why biased transmission has the particular direction and magnitude that it has in the population.
We will analyze the evolution of direct bias in much the same way that we did
the evolution of guided variation in Chapter 4. We assume that the nature of the
cultural transmission rule is genetically determined. Once again, we emphasize we
make this assumption, not because we think that it necessarily pertains to contemporary humans, but because (1) it must have been true at some stage in the evolution
of the human capacity for culture and (2) it formalizes the sociobiologists’ use of
the argument from natural origins. Even if the strength and direction of bias are
traits like any other genetically transmitted trait, it turns out that unbiased transmission can evolve under plausible assumptions.
We will proceed in three steps. First we will describe a simple model in which
alleles at a genetic locus determine the direction and magnitude of the force of
direct bias. Next we will analyze the evolutionary properties of the model in a

The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias

147

constant, homogeneous environment. In this kind of environment biased transmission will not be favored unless random variation is quite important. Finally, we
will embed this model in a heterogeneous environment. In this case, it is very
plausible that natural selection should favor biased transmission if the genetically
transmitted character can favor the locally optimal variant in each of a variety of
different habitats.

Nevertheless,

we

also find that the conditions

under which

selection will cause neighboring populations to be genetically differentiated for
cultural transmission biases are extremely restrictive.
A model of the genetic modification of direct bias
As before, assume that there are two cultural variants, c and d. Each naive individ-

ual is exposed to n cultural parents. The ith parent is characterized by a numerical
value, X;, equal to one if it has cultural variant c and equal to zero if it has variant
d. Each individual is also characterized by one of three haploid genotypes, e, f, and
h. It simplifies the notation to assign each individual a numerical genotypic value
G, as follows:
O if the individual is e
G = 41 if the individual is f
2 if the individual is h

Thus there are six possible combinations of cultural variant and genetic variant. It
will become evident as we go along why we have chosen to keep track of three
genotypes.
The assumed life cycles of genetic and cultural transmission are shown in Figure
5.4. The frequency of the individuals with genotype G and cultural variant X is Fox.
We use p to represent the frequency of variant c among models just before cultural
transmission, and therefore p = Fo, + Fy; + Foi. qo represents the frequency of
genetic variant G at this stage in the life cycle; so qg = Fg; + Foo.
Genetic

and Cultural
Parents

Genetic

_

Transmission

Cultural

Naive Offspring

Transmission

Enculturated

Offspring
Selection

Genetic and Cultural Offspring
in the Next Generation

bias.
Fig. 5.4 The life cycle assumed in the model of the evolution of direct

148

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

The probability that an offspring acquires the cultural variant ¢ given that it (1)
is exposed to parents with the cultural variants X,,. . -,Xn and (2) has genotypic

value G is given by

Prob(c|X;, . . . .Xn,G) =

2

2 i-10iXi(1
Sy ,-0(1

+ Bg)
ae

(5.14)

Bo)

This is the same model of biased transmission described in the previous section (see
Eq. 5.9), except that the bias parameter, Bg, is indexed by G to indicate that

offspring with different genotypes are characterized by different bias parameters.
For example, offspring with genotypic value equal to one (i.e. genotype e) will
have a cultural transmission rule characterized by the bias parameter B,. We will
always assume that By = 0. This means that individuals with genotype 0 have an
unbiased cultural transmission rule. We refer to genotype O as the unbiased allele.
The values assigned to B, and B, will depend on the model. For example, to model
what we call habitat-specific biases, we assume that B, and B, have the following
values:
B,

=B

Bie

b

This means that individuals with genotype | are characterized by a cultural transmission rule biased in favor of cultural variant c, and individuals with genotype 2
have a rule biased in favor of cultural variant d.
The effects of transmission. To derive the effect of transmission on the distribution
of cultural and genetic variants, assume that genetic parents are drawn nonselectively from the pool of adults. Since genetic transmission leaves the frequency
of each genotype unchanged, the frequency of genotype G among offspring is
simply qg. Given that cultural parents and naive offspring associate randomly with
regard to the offspring’s genotype, and either (1) that there are just two cultural
parents or (2) that biases are relatively weak, the frequency of individuals with
genotype G and cultural variant X among offspring, FGx, is given by

Foo = qcll — p — bep(1 — p)]
Fo: = qclp + bep(1 — p)]

(5.15)

The parameter bg represents the effective strength of the force of direct bias when
the offspring has the genotypic value G. The parameter bg will be monotonically
increasing with Bg, and when Bg = 0 it will always be true that bg = 0. The exact
relationship between the Bg and the bg will depend on the number and weights of
cultural parents (as for example in Eq. 5.6). The key feature of the model is that
if the Bg are genetically controlled so are the bg.

The six equations implied by Equation 5.15 have a simple intuitive interpretation. The population of naive offspring can be thought of as being divided into
three subpopulations in which all individuals carry the same genotypic value. From
the nature of genetic transmission we know that the subpopulation characterized by
genotype G makes up.a fraction qg of the whole population. Individuals in all three
subpopulations inherit their cultural variant from the same population of teachers.
However, the subpopulation with genotype G is characterized by the bias parameter

The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias

149

bg. Thus, a fraction [p + bep(1 — p)] of the subpopulation with genotype G
acquire cultural variant c and a fraction of the subpopulation [1 — p — bep(1 —
p)] acquire variant d.

The effects of selection. Now let us add natural selection to the model. As is
conventional in population genetical models, differences in fitness are due to
differences in probability of survival. Models with differences in fecundity can be
much more complex. Let Wex be the probability that individuals with cultural
variant X (X = 0,1) and genotype G (G = 0,1,2) survive to become adults. Assume that the values of Wcx are as given in Table 5.4. The parameter s is a measure

of the fitness of cultural variant 1 (c) in relation to cultural variant 0 (d). If s is

positive, then individuals with cultural variant 1 are more likely to survive to
adulthood than individuals with cultural variant 0. The parameter z is a measure of
the cost of biased transmission. If z is positive, then, all other things being equal,
the unbiased allele is favored over the biased alleles. This assumption is plausible
because bias entails the evaluation of alternative variants just as in the learning
models described in the last chapter. Thus, like learning, bias may entail costly
experiments or additional neurophysiological machinery.
Table 5.4 The relative fitnesses of individuals with various combinations

of genetically determined biases and cultural variants
Genotype
Cultural Variant

0

1

Y,

0
1

1
il ser

l= 7
ls 3 = %

l= w
=P R= 7

With these assumptions, the frequency of individuals with the cultural variant X
and genotype G among individuals who have survived to adulthood, Féx, is
TB
F6x

Ss
a

WexFex

S2_. (WeiF + Woke)

—

A

5.16

d°)

Equation 5.16 is exactly the same model of natural selection described in Chapter
4. The numerator gives the probability that an individual with cultural variant X
survives, Wcx, multiplied by Kx, the frequency of individuals with cultural variant

X and genetic variant G, and the denominator gives the average probability of
survival for all individuals.

The evolution of direct bias in a homogeneous environment
Combining Equations 5.15 and 5.16 results in a set of three coupled recursions, one
for the frequency of the cultural variant c and two for any pair of the genotypic
frequencies. The nature of these recursions will depend on what is assumed about
the bias and selection parameters. We begin our analysis by considering a model
of the evolution of direct bias in a single homogeneous habitat in which cultural
variant 1 (c) is always favored by natural selection and there are only two haploid
genotypes, the unbiased allele and a genotype biased in favor of cultural variant 1

150

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

= 0) or has a positive
(c). We consider only cases in which the bias is costless (z

g that the
cost (z > 0). We represent this situation mathematically by assumin
,
parameters take on the following values: b, = b, s > 0,z20

qm = 0.

track of
Because one of the genotypes has been eliminated, we need only keep
It can
q.
=
qo
the frequency of the unbiased allele, qo. To simplify the notation let
be shown that the recursions for these quantities are

q(1 + sp)/W

we
eM

(5.17)

Sahel

jah

wee

za)/W

where

W =

1+ sp{l “ED( ei)Clee) at Z(

ee}

and q” and p” are the frequencies of the unbiased allele and the cultural variant c
in the next generation.
This system of recursions has very interesting behavior. (See Box el OL
mathematical details.) At equilibrium the frequency of the favored cultural variant
is always one. If biased transmission has any direct effect on fitness (z > 0), then
the only stable equilibrium frequency of the unbiased allele is also one. If biased
transmission is completely costless (z = 0), then the equilibrium frequency of the
two genotypes is indeterminate—all frequencies of the unbiased allele are neutrally
stable equilibria.
To understand these results, consider the recursion for the frequency of q when
selection is weak (i.e. z,

s < 1) and p is fixed at some

q = q + vq! — q)

arbitrary value. Then

(5.18)

where

= b{sp(1 — p)} — z
This equation will be familiar to geneticists as the standard recursion for gene
frequency at a haploid locus when selection is weak. The direction of change of the
frequency of c depends on the sign of the parameter v, which is called the “selection
differential” of the allele c. If the selection differential is positive, the frequency of
the biased allele increases; otherwise it decreases. Notice that v depends on the
frequency of the two cultural variants. The term in braces, {sp(1 — p)}, represents
the intensity of selection on the cultural variants. Thus Equation 5.18 says that the
strength of selection in favor of the bias allele is proportional to the intensity of
selection on the cultural variants. Because variant c is always favored by selection
(and by biased transmission as well if q < 1), this variant increases in frequency
until the system reaches equilibrium at p = 1. At this equilibrium, there is no
variation and thus the intensity of selection on the cultural variants is zero. This
means that the fitness of the bias allele relative to the unbiased allele is 1 — z, and

therefore that the unbiased allele is always favored at equilibrium if z > 0. Put

The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias

151

Box 5.3 First consider the recursion for p. It is easy to show that p = 1 and p = 0
are equilibria for all values of q by simply substituting these values into both sides of
the recursion. It is also easy to show that q = 0 and q = 1 are the only possibly
equilibrium values of the recursion for q. Thus there are four possible equilibria of
the form (p, 4): (1, 1), (1, 0), (0, 1), (0, 0). To determine whether any particular
equilibrium is stable, we need to evaluate the following matrix of partial derivatives
at that equilibrium:

UD al

T=

_|

op

dq

ag"

ag”

dp

dq

If the absolute values of all of the eigenvalues of this matrix are less than one, then
the equilibrium is stable.
The directional forces of selection and direct bias both act to increase p. This
suggests that equilibria in which f = 0 will be unstable. A rigorous analysis shows
this intuition to be correct. The stability of the other equilibria is more subtle.

dq’ _ sq{W — b(1 + sp)(1 — 2p)(1 — g)}
ap
WwW?
This derivative is equal to zero at both the possible stable equilibria (1,0) and (1,1).

When one of the off-diagonal elements of a 2 x 2 matrix is zero the eigenvalues are
just the diagonal elements of the matrix. Thus these equilibria will be stable if

aq” _ (1 + pW = az ~ sbp(l ~ p))} _,
dq

Ww:

At (1, 0) and (1, 1) this derivative has the values

dq”
oq

Lt
S ae

De

dq”
oq

Thus (1, 0) is unstable unless z = 0, and (1, 1) is stable unless z = 0. If z = 0, both
equilibria are neutrally stable.

another way,

in the absence of cultural variation, the cost of bias leads to its

selective loss. Notice that this result is quite similar to the loss of guided variation
in a constant environment, as we saw in Chapter 4.
The bias allele can only be favored if some force opposes natural selection and
bias so that at equilibrium both cultural variants are maintained in the population.
When

this is the case, different cultural variants will have different fitnesses.

Individuals with an appropriately biased transmission rule will have a higher probability of acquiring the cultural variant favored by selection, and genes leading to
biased transmission may be favored by selection.
Several processes can maintain both variants in the population at equilibrium.
The simplest is random variation. If the error rate of transmission is high enough
(relative to the strengths of natural selection and biased transmission) to maintain

both cultural variants at high frequency, then the bias allele may be favored.

152

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

Notice, however, that the maximum

selection differential,

Via = (bs/4) —Z

(5.19)

occurs when p; = 1 — p,; = 0.5. Selection in favor of the biased allele depends on
the product of b and s. Thus, if either selection or bias is weak, selection in favor
of the bias allele will be weak also. However, if both bias and selection are strong,

it seems unlikely that random variation will maintain sufficient variability to allow
v to become large.
It should not be surprising that direct bias is unlikely to evolve in a population
living in a constant, homogeneous environment. In such an environment, natural
selection will tend to increase the frequency of the favored trait to a high frequency,
whether there is any bias or not. An unbiased rule, for example “just copy mom,”
will result in a high probability of acquiring the most adaptive variant. Directly
biased transmission will be favored only if there is a significant probability that
naive individuals will be exposed to maladaptive variants, or, put another way, if
they must choose among several different, potentially adaptive cultural variants.
Biased transmission in a spatially varying environment

Migration in a spatially varying environment is one force which plausibly might
maintain enough variation to favor costly biases. Consider a population which is
divided into two subpopulations which live in different habitats as in Figure 5.5.
In subpopulation 1, the culturally transmitted variant c (i.e. cultural value, X = 1)
is favored by natural selection relative to d (i.e. X = 0) by an amount 1+s:1. In
subpopulation 2, variant d is favored by an amount 1+s:1. In each generation, after
selection takes place, a fraction m of each subpopulation emigrates and is replaced
by immigrants from the other subpopulation. In this model, some naive individuals
will be exposed to cultural parents who have immigrated from the other sub-

VARIANT c¢
FAVORED
eg

e |

eegs

Fig. 5.5 The population structure assumed in the model of the evolution
of direct bias in a
spatially variable environment. The parameter m gives the fraction of each
of the two populations that emigrates each generation.

The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias

153

population and are therefore more likely to be characterized by locally maladaptive
cultural variants than are natal parents.
Because we are interested in the roles of genes and culture in determining the
variation between human groups, we will consider two different models of the
genetic control of bias. In the first, we will assume that a single allele causes
cultural transmission to be biased in favor of the cultural variant that is favored in
the local habitat. This model, the “general purpose bias” model, is a formalization
of the view that humans are equipped with general purpose filters that cause them
to select the cultural variant which is genetically adaptive in the local habitat (e. g.
Alexander,

1979a; Irons, 1979a; Durham,

1976). In the second model, we will

suppose that one allele biases cultural transmission in favor of variant c (and

therefore against d), and the other allele biases cultural transmission in favor of
variant d. This model, the “habitat-specific bias” model, is similar to the models
of Lumsden and Wilson (1981), who argue that some of the cultural differences

between human groups may result from genetic differences in the direction and
magnitude of direct biases.
General purpose bias. Suppose that there are two genotypes. Individuals characterized by the unbiased genotype, G = 0, always have unbiased cultural transmission;
the other genotype, G = 1, codes for a general purpose direct bias. Individuals
with the bias allele have a cultural transmission rule that is directly biased by an
amount B in favor of the cultural variant c in population 1 and cultural variant d
in population 2. This means that individuals with the bias allele have a higher
probability of acquiring the favored cultural variant than individuals with the
unbiased allele in both habitats.
In the last chapter we saw that ordinary learning could lead to the development
of the appropriate phenotype in a variety of habitats. Because directly biased
transmission is the application of learning to preexisting culturally available variants, it may be reasonable to suppose that directly biased transmission may favor
the locally adaptive variant in some range of habitats. For example, the cultural trait
might be the mode of preparation of corn, one variant specifying an alkali treatment
and the other not. In environments low in other sources of the amino acid mobilized
by the alkali treatment, the treatment variant might be favored, while in other
environments the no treatment variant might be favored. The bias might arise from
two different guiding criteria: (1) an innate preference for balanced amino acid
intake (e.g. rats come to prefer foods which contain nutrients in which their diet is
deficient, and it is possible that a similar mechanism could evolve in humans), and
(2) a preference for the least troublesome mode of preparing food. In environments
low in lysine this combination of factors would lead to a preference for alkali treated
corn. In other environments it would lead to a preference for the untreated corn.
(This example is drawn from Katz et al., 1974.)

With these assumptions, we must keep track of four quantities: the frequency of
one of the cultural variants and one of the genetic variants in each of the two
subpopulations. Let p; be the frequency of cultural variant c in subpopulation 1, and
let qj be the frequency of the unbiased allele. (Notice that the meaning of the
subscript on q has changed; it now indexes subpopulation.) As Box 5.4 shows, we
derive recursions for these quantities by assuming that in each subpopulation the

154

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

Box 5.4 Let p;” be the frequency of cultural variant c before migration and qi” be the
frequency of the general purpose bias allele before migration. Then the frequencies
after migration, p;” and qi”, are
pi” =

pi'(1

=

m) 4

p2” =

p2"(1

=

m) ae pi’m

qu” ay qi’(1

—

m) fe q2"m

qo” =

=

m) He qi”m

qo"(1

p2”m

Because of the symmetry of the model we know that the equilibrium frequency of the
variant c in subpopulation 1 must equal the equilibrium value of variant d in subpopulation 2. Thus

piselipo
Similarly, the equilibrium frequency of the general purpose bias allele must be the
same in both subpopulations. These facts greatly simplify finding the equilibria.
For example, consider the equilibrium value of p;. Notice that

pi = (1 — mp.” + m1 — fy")

= m + (1 — 2m)py"

Then using Equation 5.17

pi = m+ (1 — 2m)pi{{1 + bM — qi)(1 — pI — z + s) + zq}/W
where W is as given in Equation 5.17. By rearranging this equation and applying the
quadratic formula, one can show that the equilibrium value has the properties listed
in the text.

model derived above applies and then adding an episode of migration. To analyze
these recursions we first assume that the frequency of the unbiased allele is one, that
is, there are no individuals in the population with biased transmission. The recursions lead to a stable equilibrium value of the locally favored cultural variant in each
subpopulation (i.e. fp, in subpopulation 1 and 1 — f) in population 2) which is less
than or equal to one and greater than or equal to one-half. Because of the symmetry
of the model, the equilibrium frequency of the favored allele is the same in both
subpopulations (i.e. fp} =

1 — 2). When there is no migration (m = 0) the equi-

librium frequency of the favored allele is one. As the migration rate increases
(m — 4), the equilibrium frequency of the locally favored allele moves close to
one-half.
Under what conditions can the bias allele invade such a population? It can be
shown that the frequency of the bias allele will increase whenever

{(1 — p,)pis}b > z

(5.20)

Because of the symmetry of the model the frequency of the favored cultural variant
in either subpopulation can be used in Condition 5.20. This condition has two very
important properties: first, it says that selection in favor of the bias allele depends

The Adaptive Consequences of Direct Bias

155

on the product of s, the selection differential of the locally favored genotype, and
b, the strength of biased transmission. Thus, if either s or b is small then selection
in favor of the bias allele will be relatively weak. Second, selection in favor of the
bias allele depends on the amount of variability for the cultural trait. This means
that migration must be strong enough to maintain significant amounts of variation
in the population.
It is also important to realize that as the bias allele becomes more common, the
strength of selection in its favor will decrease. Directly biased transmission creates
a force increasing the frequency of the locally favored variant. As the frequency of
the bias allele increases, the equilibrium frequency of the locally favored variant
will also increase, which will have the effect of decreasing the variability present
(measured by p;(1 — §;)). This will weaken the selection in favor of the bias allele.
Condition 5.20 suggests that even if biased transmission has no cost (so that
z = 0) the bias allele will increase slowly unless b and/or s is large. For example,
suppose that s = 0.1, b = 0.1, pf; = 1 — pf. = 0.9 and that the initial frequency
of the bias allele is 0.01. With these assumptions it will take about 5000 generations
for the frequency of the bias allele to reach 0.5. If we assume that a human
generation is about 20 years, 5000 generations corresponds to 100,000 years,

roughly the age of the species “Homo sapiens” (Pilbeam, 1972: Chap. 8).
Habitat-specific bias. Next let us consider the evolution of two “special purpose”
bias genotypes. Suppose that individuals characterized by genotype 1 always have
a cultural transmission rule biased in favor of cultural variant c and that individuals
characterized by genotype 2 always have a cultural transmission rule biased in favor
of cultural variant d. This means that we must keep track of six quantities, the

frequencies of one cultural variant and two genetic variants in each subpopulation.
We have chosen to use the favored cultural variant in each subpopulation (i.e. c in
subpopulation 1 and d in subpopulation 2), which we label p;, and the two biased
alleles q;; and q2; where in both cases i refers to the ith subpopulation.
With these assumptions, we can derive a system of six coupled recursions
exactly as above. In this case we assume that the unbiased allele has an initial
frequency of zero. This simplifies the calculations. It can be shown that at equilibrium both the frequency of the favored cultural variant and that of the allele that
is biased in favor of the favored variant in each subpopulation are between one and
one-half. Once again, the symmetry of the model causes the equilibrium frequency
of the favored cultural variant and that of the allele biased in favor of that variant
to be the same. As in the case of general purpose biases, increasing the migration
rate moves the equilibrium values of the favored cultural variants closer to one-half.
Under what conditions can the unbiased allele invade such a population? It can
be shown that it can invade whenever

[41 — 42] {1 — pipistb < z

(5.21)

where 4, and qp are the frequencies of the alleles biased in favor of cultural variants
c and d in population 1, the subpopulation in which cultural variant c is favored.
For given values of s, b, and z, the fact that q, and qp are less than one guarantees
it will be easier for the unbiased allele to invade a population with habitat-specific

156

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

biases than one with general purpose biases. Just how much easier depends on the
magnitude of the difference between the equilibrium frequencies of the two biased
alleles. If this difference is small, then the unbiased allele will be able to invade a
population with habitat-specific biases much more easily than a population with
general purpose biases. If it is large, then there will be little difference between the
two situations. Figure 5.6 shows critical values of the ratio z/s necessary for the
unbiased allele to be able to invade a population with habitat-specific bias. Clearly,
the habitat-specific bias must be very cheap if it is to evolve.
This result has a simple intuitive explanation. For directly biased transmission
to be strongly favored by selection, migration must maintain enough variability to
create a significant probability that offspring will be exposed to maladaptive variants. This means that migration must be a strong force relative to selection.
Habitat-specific bias can be advantageous only if alleles for the bias appropriate to
a particular habitat are more common in that habitat than other alleles. Natural
selection acts to increase the frequency of such alleles because directly biased
transmission generates an association between them and the locally favored cultural
variant. Because the effect of selection on bias alleles is indirect, the intensity of
selection on the alleles is always less than the intensity of selection on the cultural
variants themselves. This means that migration is a strong force relative to the
selection of the bias alleles, and therefore, we should not expect alleles that code
for the appropriate habitat-specific bias to become very much more common than
the other biased allele.
We expect this effect to be quite robust. It arises from two factors which do not
depend on the details of the particular model presented above. If the environment
is nearly constant and the force of random variation is weak compared to selection,
biased transmission is not needed; selection alone will do the job. If environmental
variation is great enough to make bias profitable, then, because selection on the

10°2
10-3
fis
/s

10°4

10>

OFF

‘2

ee

Fig. 5.6 The threshold values of the ratio of the cost of bias (z) to the selection
advantage of

the locally favored variant (s) as a function of the migration rate (m) for
three values of the

bias parameter, b. If the value of z/s exceeds this threshold value, the unbiased
allele is favored
relative to two habitat-specific bias alleles.

An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses

157

determinants of bias is indirect, it will always be weaker than the selection acting
on the cultural variants themselves. The variations in the environment will also
attenuate the genetic differentiation necessary for genetically transmitted habitatspecific biases to be effective. Pulliam (1983) has reached similar conclusions with

a somewhat different model. We conjecture that these results are one instance of
a more general phenomenon. Namely, natural selection (acting on genes) usually
will not favor the cultural transmission of behavior unless cultural transmission can
accomplish something that could not be achieved through genetic transmission
alone. A population with habitat-specific bias is adapting to a spatially variable
environment through the genetic differentiation of the population, a mode of response to varying environmental conditions that is available to noncultural species.
In fact, ordinary genetic adaptation works better without the existence of the
intervening process of cultural transmission. In contrast, a population with general
purpose biases is adapting to the varying environment in a manner not available to
noncultural organisms, and, we conjecture, therefore general purpose biases can be
favored by selection.
An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses
Guided variation and direct bias are “sociobiological’ forces
As we have noted, the forces of guided variation and directly biased transmission
are derived forces; if they are the only forces that affect cultural evolution, then we

should expect that the human sociobiologists will be successful in predicting human
behavior using sociobiological theory. The force of guided variation tends to
increase the frequency of the cultural variants that are favored by learning. Similarly, the force of biased transmission increases the frequency of the variant favored
by bias. Ultimately, to explain the direction of each force, we must understand what
has shaped the evolution of the direction and magnitude of guided variation and
direct bias. We have taken pains to emphasize that the guiding criteria may be
inherited culturally, and therefore that their evolution may be explained in terms of
the forces that affect the frequency of cultural variants. However, if the only forces
which shape cultural evolution are guided variation and directly biased transmission, this would seem of little consequence; in the end, the only organizing
force in cultural evolution would be natural selection acting on genetically transmitted predispositions, and we would expect that, with the usual caveats, we would
be able to predict cultural variation by asking what increases genetic fitness.
In the next three chapters, we will investigate several autonomous forces of
cultural evolution, forces which do not derive their direction from guiding criteria
in any simple way. Before doing this, however, it will be useful to consider whether
the sociobiological models we have developed so far are adequate, at least in
principle, to explain the evolution of the diversity of behaviors that characterizes
different human groups. If the models are adequate as they stand, then we could
conclude that human sociobiologists have developed a cogent hypothesis. As we
shall see, even the limited range of models that we have analyzed so far can be

interpreted in a variety of ways to explain human behavioral variation. We will
conclude that some of these interpretations are plausible, while others are not.

158

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

Explanations for the differences between human groups

Compared with other animals, behavior in the human species is extremely varied.
Individuals belonging to different human groups exploit a wide range of habitats
using a variety of disparate subsistence techniques; they utilize widely different
kinds of clothing and shelter, perform different rituals, depend on different kinds
of social and political organization, and speak different languages. Although it
could be argued that the social organization and adaptive strategy of most human
groups are similar to those found in some other species, there is no other single
animal species which exhibits the range of behaviors that characterize the human
species.
The only two sources of the behavioral and morphological variation between
populations of noncultural organisms are environmental variation and genetic variation. Two genetically identical populations may differ because they live in different environments, the same genetically transmitted developmental program giving
rise to different phenotypes in the different environments. Or two populations in
similar environments may differ because they have different genetic compositions,
either because selection has favored different genotypes in the different environments or because of some historical accident, such as random genetic drift.
It is possible to explain the differences between human populations in terms of
the same mechanisms that are at work in other species. In the human case, however, heritable cultural variation provides another potential source of variation.
Two genetically identical human populations living in the same environment may
behave differently because they have different culturally transmitted traditions. To
take an obvious example, genetically similar individuals from different populations
which live in similar environments might speak very different languages.
A large number of other proposals have been advanced to explain how learning,
genetic transmission, and cultural transmission interact to determine human behavior (e.g. Ruyle, 1973; Durham, 1976; Boehm, 1978; Alexander, 1979a, b; Harris,
1979; Baldwin and Baldwin, 1981; Lumsden and Wilson, 1981; Plotkin and

Odling-Smee, 1981). Virtually all of them rely on some combination of ordinary
learning, guided variation, and directly biased transmission to explain human
adaptations. We think it is useful to think of these views as varying in two
dimensions: the first is the relative importance of environmental variation versus
genetic variation, and the other is the importance of heritable cultural variation.
From this perspective there are four polar hypotheses, as Table 5.5 shows.

Table 5.5 Four polar hypotheses regarding the relative importance of genetic and
cultural variation in explaining behavioral variation in humans
Heritable Cultural

Heritable Cultural

Variation Unimportant

Variation Important

Pure environment

Environment + culture

Pure genes

Genes + culture

Genetic Variation

Unimportant
Genetic Variation
Important

An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses

159

Proponents of the “environmental” hypotheses in the first row agree that the
differences between human populations are due to responses to different environments and that the genetic differences between human groups are relatively trivial.
Human behavior results from the interaction of a panhuman genetic program and
a variable environment. The hypotheses differ in the emphasis given to heritable
cultural variation. Proponents of a “pure environment” hypothesis would argue that
the forces of guided variation and biased transmission are so strong that no understanding of the dynamics of cultural evolution is required. Richard Alexander’s
(e.g. 1979a) approach approximates this view. In contrast, adherents of a “culture
plus environment” hypothesis would argue that these forces are relatively weak; in
the short run most of the variation between groups is the result of different culturally transmitted traditions. In the longer run, however, the forces of guided
variation and biased transmission are seen as ensuring that cultural variations are
genetically adaptive. William Durham (1976, 1977, 1978, 1982) has defended a
position close to this one in several papers.
Adherents of the “genetic” hypotheses of the second row agree that the differences between human populations are due primarily to genetic differences. They
disagree on the extent to which these differences are mediated by cultural transmission. A proponent of the “pure genes” view would hold that most of the
differences between human populations are simply due to genetic differences. One
proponent of this view, C. D. Darlington (1969: 35), went so far as to ascribe the

differences in language between human groups to genetically inherited differences
in the morphology of the vocal tract. While not nearly so extreme, some of the
models presented by Lumsden and Wilson (1981, see especially their Chap. 6)
attribute differences between human groups to a combination of genetic differences
and ordinary learning with little role for cultural transmission as we have defined
it. Proponents of a “culture plus genes” view might concede that cultural transmission is important in determining human behavior, but there is genetic variation
for the guiding criteria that govern the direction and magnitude of the forces of
guided variation and biased transmission. Individuals in each local population have
genetically transmitted biases that predispose them to acquire locally adaptive
variants. In this way behavior can be culturally transmitted but at the same time the
differences between populations are ultimately determined by genetic differences.
The models presented in the early chapters of Lumsden and Wilson come close to
this genes plus culture hypothesis.
In the remainder of this chapter we recast each of these four polar sociobiological
hypotheses in the dual inheritance framework we have developed so far. We think
that this is a fruitful exercise for two reasons. First, it can shed some light on what

must be assumed to make each of the hypotheses plausible. Based on this exercise
we will argue that the conditions necessary to support the pure genes and the genes
plus culture views are extremely restricted. Second, there are good empirical
reasons to suppose that the forces of guided variation and directly biased transmission are often quite weak, and therefore that the culture plus environment view
is appropriate for at least some traits. This makes it more likely that other forces
of cultural evolution are important and thus that the models of subsequent chapters
are interesting.

160

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

The pure environment hypothesis
The pure environment hypothesis holds that human behavior results from the
interaction between panhuman, genetically transmitted developmental rules and the
local environment. Different human groups have different behaviors because individual humans quickly determine the best behavior in the local environment. The
adherents of this hypothesis hold that there is little important genetic variation for
behavior in the human species and that the transmission properties of culture are
also unimportant. In the terms of the model of guided variation presented in Chapter
4, the most extreme version of this hypothesis requires that individuals be capable
of acquiring enough information to be able to modify their behavior to maximize
genetic fitness, no matter how

much

information

must be acquired.

In a less

extreme version of the hypothesis, a flow of ideas among people living in different
environments would allow some heritable cultural variation.
We believe that the views of Richard Alexander come close to the pure environment hypothesis. While Alexander does not think that learning is perfect, he clearly
believes that bias and guided variation are strong enough to completely dominate
the evolutionary dynamics of culture. Alexander (1979a: 78-79) writes:
To whatever extent the use of culture by individuals is learned—and if this is
not the rule then one is at a loss to explain how any special human capacity to
use and transmit culture could have evolved—regularity of learning situations
or environmental consistency is the link between genetic instructions and cultural instructions which makes the latter not a replicator at all but, in historical
terms, a vehicle of the genetic replicators.

Cultural inertia, Alexander (1979a: 77) thinks,
derives from the conflicts of interest among individuals and subgroups, from
power distributions that result in stalemates, and from the incidental long-term
persistence of some cultural institutions.

Thus Alexander does not view cultural transmission as a process that can preserve
variation in the face of the forces of guided variation and direct bias.
In some respects, the pure environment hypothesis is a plausible one. Guided
variation and directly biased transmission are powerful mechanisms for causing
cultural evolution to generate behaviors that favor genetic fitness. Whenever it is
easy to determine what is the best behavior in the local habitat, we might expect
that the pure environment hypothesis will be approximately correct. Examined
closely, the pure environment hypothesis boils down to the proposition that what
we have defined as culture, the transmission of information via social learning, is
relatively unimportant. A combination of ordinary genetic traits, a powerful system
of ordinary learning, and very selective learning from others are sufficient to
account for human behavior.
There are two reasons to suspect that, contrary to the pure environment hypothesis, culture has an important role in determining the differences between human
groups. First, we think that the empirical evidence reviewed in Chapter 3 suggests
that culture behaves as a fairly conservative transmission system. Second,
it is
plausible, on both theoretical and empirical grounds, that for many kinds
of characters strong direct bias and guided variation would simply be too costly;
they

An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses

161

would require too much effort to evaluate the state of the environment and the
payoffs to various strategies in such an environment.
To understand why we think learning generally may be quite costly, consider the
example of the East African groups studied by Edgerton, which were discussed in
Chapter 3. Consider a group of individuals who move from a moist region in which
horticulture predominates to an arid region where they adopt pastoralism as an
important part of their subsistence. It seems reasonable that many beliefs and values
which were adaptive in a purely horticultural society would no longer be adaptive
in the new habitat. What is the right mix of herding and farming? What are the
relative values of land and cattle? How should one behave toward one’s male
kinsmen? Toward one’s neighbors? How many children should a family have? The
adherents of the pure environment hypothesis would imagine that the new pastoralists could easily determine the answers to these questions by themselves or,
alternatively, observe a wide range of strategies employed by others and easily
select the best ones for their own situation.
We are more impressed with the difficulties of most of these choices. When yield
varies from year to year and from place to place, determining the optimal mix of
herding and farming might be quite difficult. A useful trial of a particular strategy
could occupy a substantial portion of a person’s life. It seems even more difficult
to determine the correct family size or the proper attitudes toward relatives. For
these kinds of traits, copying the strategies of other individuals, perhaps making
marginal improvements, seems a more practical course. This in turn would have the
effect of weakening the forces of guided variation and biased transmission, and
therefore of allowing substantial heritable cultural variation. As we noted in Chapter 3, Edgerton’s data support this view.
All human choices may not be so difficult. Behaviors whose consequences are
obvious or at least easy to learn should evolve rapidly when conditions change
under the influence of direct bias and guided variation. For example, Edgerton
(1971: 281) notes that cultural heritage explains little of the variation in behavior
surrounding conflict among neighbors. The farming groups are all characterized by
repressed hostility, suspicion, and the use of covert means of aggression such as
witchcraft, while the pastoralist groups openly express their aggression. Edgerton
argues that these differences result from the differences in individual mobility under
the two subsistence modes. Farmers who quarrel with their neighbors incur a grave
risk of a lengthy, costly feud because land ownership keeps neighbors in proximity
to each other. Pastoralists who quarrel, by contrast, can simply move their camps
to distant locations. It is easy to believe that pastoralists could recognize that their
mobility permits free expression of discontent with their neighbors and that farmers
could foresee the consequence of feuding.

The environment plus culture hypothesis
It is possible to include an important role for culturally transmitted traditions and
still maintain that human behavior can, on average, be predicted by considerations
of what maximizes genetic fitness. The key to this culture plus environment hypothesis is the fact that direct bias and guided variation do not have to be very strong
forces in order to have important effects. For example, suppose that each naive

162

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

offspring acquires one of two cultural variants according to a directly biased
transmission rule such that b = 0.1. This means (from Table 5.2) that the proba-

bility that an offspring who is exposed to a set of cultural parents with different

cultural variants will adopt the favored variant is only 0.55. Nonetheless, when the

favored variant is rare it will increase at a compounded rate of 10 percent per
generation! The model of cultural evolution by guided variation has similar properties.

This hypothesis is clearly consistent with the evidence that culture is a stable
inheritance system. It is only supposed that direct bias and guided variation keep
cultural variation on track in the long run. In the short run, most of the variation
between groups can be explained in terms of cultural history. Such weak biases are
also consistent with the hypothesis that it is costly for individuals to evaluate the
merit of alternative cultural variants. Suppose that two alternative variants are
tested in a series of trials. Thus, for example, one trial of each alternative might
yield a 55 percent chance of choosing the superior one, two trials 59 percent, three
trials 62.5 percent, and so on. If the cost of a single trial is significant, then weak
biases may be relatively cheap compared with strong ones.
William Durham

(1977,

1978,

1979,

1982) has defended a view of cultural

evolution very close to the culture plus environment hypothesis. Durham clearly
believes that culture is an inheritance system:
An attribute may increase in frequency in a human population when it is spread
by learning and maintained by tradition. Here the transmission of the attribute
may be completely distinct from the biological processes of inheritance. Instead
of differential reproduction, theories of cultural evolution propose that human
attributes result from the differential replication by learning and imitation of
variants introduced into a “cultural pool” by innovation and diffusion. [1979:
40]

Durham nonetheless believes that these culturally transmitted behaviors are
usually biologically adaptive. Durham identifies four mechanisms which ensure
that culturally transmitted behavior is adaptive. Three of these correspond to the
mechanisms of direct bias or guided variation as we have defined them:
People remain somehow selective in their receptivity to cultural innovation. . . . I believe that this ongoing selective retention is, and always
has been, influenced by a number of human biases which tend to keep people
from selectively retaining cultural attributes that run counter to their individual
survival and reproduction. . . . Of these, perhaps the most important are
learned biases. Robert LeVine (1973) has argued that the process of socialization teaches children from an early age not only adherence to social norms
and traditional patterns of behavior but also selectivity in the adoption of new
forms—a selectivity based on what is held to be adaptive and “for their own
good.”
A second sort of bias might be called the bias of “satisfaction.” Presumably
throughout the organic evolution of hominids there was a persistent, genetic
selective advantage for a neurophysiology which rewarded with sensory reinforcements and a feeling of ‘satisfaction’ those acts likely to enhance survival
and reproduction. . . .

An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses

There is potentially a third source

163

of bias to be found in the learning

structures and functions of the human brain. . . . [Durham,

1978: 431-432]

Durham’s fourth mechanism is not a bias in our terms, but the natural selection of

cultural variations. We will consider this topic in the next chapter.

The pure genes hypothesis

The pure genes hypothesis holds that the observed differences between different
human groups have a significant genetic component. The most extreme version of
this hypothesis would posit that human behavior is a highly canalized genetically
controlled character, like finger number. In this view, most of the differences that

are usually attributed to tradition are genetic. Very few contemporary scholars hold
such an extreme hypothesis. However, there are many scholars who, while allowing an important role for environment, learning, and culture, believe that at least

some significant portion of the differences between human groups has a genetic
basis.
The simplest genetic hypothesis holds that only genetic and environmental
differences are important and that the dynamic properties of cultural transmission
can safely be ignored. The models of “cultural evolution” presented by Lumsden
and Wilson (1981) in Chapters 5 and 6 fall into this category. Lumsden and Wilson
imagine that there are two behavioral variants which they call “culturgens” and that
every individual is aware of both variants. What varies between individuals in their
model is the variant actually used. They suppose that, every so often, each individual evaluates its behavior and with some probability stops using the variant that it
currently uses and adopts the alternative variant. This constitutes a simple model
of learning. If individuals characterized by variant 1 are more likely to adopt variant
2 than individuals characterized by 2 are to adopt 1, then the learning process (or,
as they put it, the “epigenetic rule”) favors variant 2. Lumsden and Wilson do allow
the frequency of usage of the two variants among an individual’s peers or among
members of the parental generation to affect the probabilities of switching behaviors. In our terminology, this constitutes a form of cultural transmission. However,
in their actual analysis, transmission is assumed to be so weak in its effects that it
has no qualitative impact (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 288).

It is important to understand that Lumsden and Wilson do not assert that transmission effects are always unimportant; in fact, they analyze other models in which
such effects have an important role. However, their strongest claims about the
general nature of human evolution are derived from the model described above
(Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 286-300). At the very least they appear to believe
that it applies to some important portion of human behaviors.
Lumsden and Wilson introduce genetic variation into their model by assuming
that a single diploid genetic locus (with two alleles) affects the probability of
changing usage from one cultural variant to the other. Individuals who are homozygous for one of the alleles switch from one variant to the other with a constant
probability of one-half. They refer to this homozygote as the “tabula rasa” genotype. Individuals who are homozygous for the other allele have a probability greater
than one-half of switching from the deleterious cultural variant to the favored
cultural variant, and a probability of remaining with the favored variant that is also

164

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

greater than one-half. This homozygote, which they refer to as the bias genotype,
has a genetic predisposition to learn to use the cultural variant favored by natural
selection. Heterozygotes are assumed to be either tabula rasa or biased depending
on the direction of dominance.
Based on this model, Lumsden and Wilson then go on to show that the biased
allele will increase very rapidly in frequency. They argue for the adoption of a rule
of thumb, which they call the “thousand year rule,” to the effect that human
populations which exist in the same environment for roughly 1000 years should
have genes which cause individuals to preferentially acquire the locally favored
phenotypic variants. Lumsden and Wilson do not explicitly apply this to the
question of the differences between human groups. Their model deals with a single
population in an unchanging environment. However, it is easy to interpret them
(e.g. Maynard Smith and Warren, 1982) as implying that human populations that
are separated for more than 1000 years should be expected to be genetically
differentiated at loci which control the learning process.
Whatever Lumsden and Wilson might have intended, their model gives no
justification for a general “thousand year rule.” The rapid change in gene frequency
in their model is due to two assumptions: First, they assume that selection on the
phenotype is extremely strong; one variant has a fivefold advantage in the gathering
of resources. This advantage translates into fitness in a complicated way which
nonetheless maintains a substantial difference in fitness (Maynard Smith and Warren, 1982). Second, they assume that there is no migration between populations
living in different habitats. We have seen that selection on the determinants of bias
is weak unless selection is quite strong and learning quite effective. For this reason,
generally a small amount of migration among groups will be sufficient to prevent
the populations from differentiating genetically. From the viewpoint of our models,
Lumsden and Wilson chose the only situation which would yield a significant
amount of genetic differentiation between populations.
Lumsden and Wilson’s model is curious in another way. In discussing the origin
of human cognition (pp. 329-330), Lumsden and Wilson imagine that “cosmic
good fortune” was required to overcome the initial costs of elaborate human
cognitive abilities. In the particular model to which we have been referring, bad
fortune seems a more apt description. The tabula rasa genotype is assumed to
acquire one of the two phenotypic variants at random; in effect, tabula rasa individuals choose their phenotype by flipping a coin. The biased genotype which bears
the cognitive costs does only slightly better. Since Lumsden and Wilson assume a
constant environment, a fixed genetic specification of the appropriate behavior
would clearly be an advantage, and so would an accurate but unbiased system of
social learning. What Lumsden and Wilson have shown is that a genetically determined learning rule is superior to choosing behavior at random in an environment
in which learning is of no utility. It seems to us that this result is not very surprising,
and that the more interesting question is whether there are any circumstances in
which accurate, weakly biased or unbiased social learning is superior to any
combination of individual learning and genetic transmission. The models analyzed
in this chapter and the last one suggest that such conditions do in fact exist (see also

Pulliam, 1983).

An Evaluation of Sociobiological Hypotheses

165

The genes plus culture hypothesis

The final hypothesis we consider is the genes plus culture hypothesis. Proponents
of this hypothesis hold that the transmission properties of culture are important, and
that, in the short run, much of the behavioral variation both between and within

human beings is attributable to heritable cultural variation. In the long run, however, this hypothesis holds that the direction of cultural evolution is determined by
the forces of guided variation and directly biased transmission, and that the strength

and direction of these forces vary among human populations because of genetic
differences among them. For example, it might be supposed that one population has
genes that predispose its members to adopt patrilineal social organization and a
second population has genes that bias cultural transmission in favor of matrilineal
ideology. In this way the lion’s share of human behavior can be transmitted
culturally, and at the same time the differences between human groups are ultimately attributable to genetic variation.
We know of no author who has explicitly defended a genes plus culture position.
However, this hypothesis is implicit in the work of Lumsden and Wilson. In
Chapter 4 of their book, Genes, Mind, and Culture, Lumsden and Wilson describe

their most general model of the process of cultural transmission. In this model they
allow the usage rate of a particular phenotypic variant in a population to affect the
probability that individuals will adopt that variant. This introduces a combination
of vertical, oblique, and horizontal cultural transmission into their model. They use
this model to explain the historical inertia of cultural evolution and the shape of the
frequency distribution usage rates among different societies or, in their terminology, “the ethnographic curve.” When genetic determination of the rules of
cultural transmission is added to their model, Lumsden and Wilson almost eliminate any cultural transmission from it. It seems clear from their discussion (p. 286)

that this was done for mathematical convenience (i.e. the complete model was too
difficult to solve), and that Lumsden and Wilson see the same basic evolutionary
process governing both the genes that bias social learning and those that bias
ordinary learning.
We think that the results of this chapter suggest that the genes plus culture
hypothesis is unlikely to be correct. We considered two models of the evolution of
genes that underlie direct bias in a spatially varying environment—one in which an
allele for a general purpose bias competed against an allele for accurate and
unbiased transmission (the unbiased allele) and a second in which two alleles, each

biasing cultural transmission in favor of a specific variant, competed with an
unbiased allele. We saw in the first model that alleles for general purpose biases
could be favored by selection under a range of conditions. To the extent to which
these conditions are plausible, this conclusion supports the culture plus environment hypothesis. In contrast, the second model suggests that it is very unlikely that
alleles for habitat-specific biases could outcompete an unbiased allele. When migration between different habitats is weak, natural selection increases the frequency
of the locally favored cultural variant so that biases can have little additional
beneficial effect. When migration is strong it swamps the genetic differentiation
that is necessary if genetically transmitted habitat-specific biases are going to be

166

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

effective. A similar model can be constructed for the case of guided variation, and
it yields the same qualitative result.

The Empirical Evidence

The four sociobiological hypotheses outlined above suggest a variety of important
empirical questions. Are direct bias and guided variation typically strong or weak?
Do direct bias and guided variation typically act to increase the frequency of
fitness-enhancing cultural variants? Is there any evidence that there is genetic
variation within or among groups for characters which affect direct bias and guided
variation? These and other empirical questions must be answered before we can
understand the role of culture in human evolution.
In this section we consider some of the empirical evidence that bears on the
question, How strong are the forces of guided variation and direct bias? In the
remainder of this book we will consider the effects of natural selection on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation, frequency-dependent bias, and indirect
bias. We will see that all of these three processes may act to increase the frequency
of cultural variants that have lower genetic fitness than some other variants. We
refer to these three processes as “maladaptive,” recognizing that, while their effect
on any particular trait may be maladaptive, it is still plausible that, taken over many
cultural traits, they are adaptive. These maladaptive processes will be important
only if direct bias and guided variation are weak enoughto permit some characters
to have substantial cultural heritability.
The other questions listed are also clearly of interest. We have chosen not to try
to address them for several reasons. First, several of them are addressed at some

length in the sociobiological literature. We have neglected some because we are
less interested in which sociobiological hypothesis is most likely to be correct than
we are in examining alternative models in which the “maladaptive” forces are
important. Finally, the existing empirical evidence seems to us to be too flimsy to
provide convincing answers to these general questions about the nature of guided
variation and direct bias.
Evidence from the studies of the diffusion of innovations

Studies of the diffusion of innovations provide a useful body of data for judging the
relative importance of strong versus weak direct bias. Modern science and technology have developed a cornucopia of useful techniques and products that present
potential users of such technology with a wide variety of choices of new cultural
behaviors. The individual decision to adopt or not adopt proffered innovations is
a relatively simple one. Most of the innovations that have been studied involve
economic or health advantages, and the great expense and complexity of developing the innovation have been borne by others. Often, cadres of specialists act as
“change agents” to bring potentially useful innovation to the attention of potential
users. The adopters need only assess the suitability of the innovation to their own
Situation and, if they choose to adopt, learn to adapt the innovation to local
circumstances. These seem to us to be very favorable conditions for direct bias to
be a strong force increasing the frequency of favorable innovations.

The Empitical Evidence

167

Rogers with Shoemaker (1971) reviewed over 1000 studies of the diffusion of
innovations using the method of content analysis. (Also see Rogers, 1983, for a
more recent discussion of these data.) The effect of direct bias is clearly evident in
many of the cases they examine. The classic examples are the adoption of hybrid
corn seed and 2,4-D weedkiller by farmers in the United States. Both these innovations were adopted by virtually all farmers within ten years of their introduction.
Similar rates of adoption of steel cutting implements in place of stone tools by
aboriginal cultivators have frequently been observed. Rogers and Shoemaker also
discussed cases in which useless innovations were effectively avoided. They (Rogers with Shoemaker, 1971: 139) summarized: “Almost every one of these studies
reports a positive relationship between relative advantage [of innovations compared
to existing practices] and their rate of adoption. Perhaps this result is so self-evident
as to be of little surprise.” Clearly, direct bias can be a potent force.
However, much of their discussion focused on the difficulty of diffusing objectively useful innovations to potential users. These problems are illustrated by the
difficulties encountered by a public health worker in Peru in an unsuccessful
attempt to convince rural villagers to boil drinking water (Rogers, 1983: 1-5). As
obvious as the benefits to health from this practice were to the professional change
agent, she was unable to convince villagers because her theory of disease was in
conflict with theirs, because producing boiled water takes some effort and people
do not like its taste, and because many of the intended adopters distrusted government workers (an indirect bias effect). A common finding of studies of the diffusion
of innovations is that a series of such impediments have to be removed before

adoption occurs, even for highly useful innovations. Another common finding is
that a small group of innovators and early adopters play a big role in the diffusion
of most innovations even among relatively sophisticated people like farmers in the
United States. Typically, early adopters are better educated, have wider social
contacts, and are more prosperous than later adopters, who tend to acquire innovations simply by copying the early adopters (another indirect bias effect).
Rogers and Shoemaker’s analysis of the diffusion of innovations is consistent
with our interpretation of the models presented in the last two chapters. When it is
easy for individuals to evaluate the utility of innovations, direct bias and guided
variation can be powerful forces. Innovations tend to be adopted more slowly, on
the other hand, when they are complex, difficult to try out on an experimental basis,
or hard to observe (Rogers, 1983: 230-232). In the case of technical innovations,

research and development institutions bear a large fraction of the cost of evaluating
alternative variants. Early adopters are those individuals able to bear the remainder
of the decision-making costs, having acquired the cognitive skills to make accurate
evaluations (better education, wider experience) and the economic resources to bear

the costs of trials that may fail. For those individuals for whom the costs of
exercising bias or guided variation are higher, and for innovations that require more
effort to evaluate, people adopt innovations, if they adopt at all, by copying the
behavior of others they respect. Later adopters usually do not use an innovation on
a trial basis or engage in learning to adapt the innovation to their peculiar circumstances. Very often existing tradition acts as a deterrent to innovation and only
innovations carefully tailored for compatibility to traditional practices are successful (Rogers with Shoemaker, 1971: 143-154; Rogers, 1983: 223-230). The excep-

168

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

tional people who have a generally positive orientation to innovations include those
with a wider circle of cosmopolitan acquaintances and quite considerable financial
resources to absorb the costs of risky trials.
Evidence from behavioral decision theory

The conservative behavior of most people when confronted with innovations is
comprehensible given our ability to make rational decisions. During the last decade
a large literature has developed in psychology comparing actual human choice
behavior to the normative expectations of formal theories of rationality. Recent
reviews include Slovic et al. (1977), Nisbett and Ross (1980), and Einhorn and

Hogarth (1981). The general conclusion of behavioral decision theory, as it is
called, is that humans ordinarily make quite poor judgments, particularly when
problems are novel or require statistical evaluation. Decisions are made using a
series of rules of thumb, called heuristics, that cause individuals to form confident

opinions based on inadequate or badly biased information and then hold to these
opinions in the face of substantial disconfirming data.
Tversky and Kahneman’s (1974) influential paper describes three general classes
of judgment heuristics—representativeness, availability, and anchoring—discovered in the course of choice and judgment experiments. The representativeness
heuristic is applied to a variety of problems in which one has to judge the probability of an event. Judgments of this type are often based on the resemblance of the
event to the population from which it may have been drawn. For example, given
a personality profile, people judge the probability that the person described belongs
to various occupational groups on the basis of conventional stereotypes. People
described as shy and withdrawn but helpful are judged much more likely to be
librarians than surgeons, while for bold egotists the probabilities will be reversed.
The representativeness heuristic is often effective in making judgments, but in the
psychology laboratory it can be shown to lead to gross distortions relative to
normatively appropriate techniques.
The representativeness heuristic leads to a variety of fallacies, including: (1)
Because people expect samples to be representative of the population from which
they are drawn, their inferences are erroneously insensitive to sample size and
reliability of data. This causes people to make confident predictions on the basis of
normatively insufficient data. (2) The representativeness heuristic causes the nature
of chance events to be misconceived. If someone has a run of bad luck, most people
think his luck is “due” to change because it must do so if the sample is to be
representative of the population, even though normative theory holds that future
trials are independent of past events. (3) The effect of regression to the mean is
poorly appreciated because people expect each event to represent the process that
gives rise to it.
People commonly use the ease with which instances or occurrences of an event
can be brought to mind to estimate its probability. Kahneman and Tversky label this
the “availability heuristic.” Often effective, it gives rise to errors when the availability of information in memory does not correspond to the real frequency of
events. Nisbett and Ross (1980) give many examples of this effect. Personal
observations or reports of friends about products such as autos are given much more

The Empitical Evidence

169

weight in decision making than pallid statistical information of much greater objective value. Correlations between events are often misjudged because cooccurrences are easily remembered, whereas other combinations, especially joint
nonoccurrences, are hardly ever taken into account. Virtually any laboratory manipulation of attentional factors changes subjects’ causal interpretations of experimental events, and so forth.
Anchoring heuristics involve the use of some starting point to think about a
problem, followed by adjustments on the basis of further observations about the
problem. Typically, the adjustments made are far too conservative. Nisbett and
Ross (1980: Chap. 8) devote considerable attention to what is perhaps the most
serious consequence of the anchoring heuristic, people’s resistance to evidence
discrediting their causal theories about particular processes. Having argued earlier
that causal theories are often inappropriately mobilized by the availability and
representativeness heuristics (Chap. 6), they discuss the striking tendency of judges
to stick with inappropriate theories in the face of disconfirming evidence. They
describe several experiments in which subjects were led to form causal hypotheses
about some events, such as an occupational outcome (success as a firefighter), and

some predictive variable (risk preference assessed on a written test). Typically two
groups of subjects are encouraged to acquire opposite theories about the relationship in question. (It is easy to believe that the dangerous nature of a fireman’s
job requires either extra caution or a bold approach.) Then the experimenters
discredit the information subjects received during a debriefing session. Typically,
however, both groups of subjects show a marked tendency to cling to the erroneous
belief they have formed, whatever it is, in the face of substantial efforts to discredit

its evidential basis. More generally, people seem to form causal beliefs on slender
evidence, and subsequently remember and use confirming instances to reinforce the
belief while forgetting or discrediting disconfirming evidence.
The behavioral decision theory literature is now quite large, and paints a depressing picture of human decision-making abilities. Is there any possibility that this
portrait is overdrawn? After all, most people in the real world do solve complex
problems and behave competently in their everyday lives. Somehow the generally
successful and appropriate actions people take in the real world must be reconciled
with their failure in the laboratory. First, one wonders if the bias effects are a
laboratory artifact not exhibited routinely in real-world decisions. This seems not
to be the case. Nisbett and Ross (1980: 251) reply to this criticism by noting that
laboratory experiments usually present simplified versions of real-life decision
tasks. For example, data are usually supplied in a form that does not tax memory
or require judgments about the pertinence or quality of the numbers given. They
argue that laboratory tasks should show human decision making at its best. Slovic
et al. (1977: 19) summarized field studies on predictive tasks: “(a) Experienced
weather forecasters, when performing their customary tasks, are excellently calibrated. (b) Everybody else stinks.” Second, it could be that the normative statistical
models with which intuitive judgments are compared are themselves flawed with
respect to the problems people actually have to solve. There is probably some truth
to this proposition. Einhorn and Hogarth (1981) note that the tendency of decision
makers to be insufficiently regressive by normative statistical standards is only a
fair comparison if the statistics available are representative of a stationary process.

170

Biased Transmission and the Sociobiology Debate

In a progressively changing world, extreme, nonregressive predictions may well be
warranted. Still they summarize: “To consider human judgment as suboptimal
without discussion of the limitations of optimal models is naive. On the other hand,
we do not imply that inappropriate optimal models always, or even usually, account
for observed discrepancies.” (See also Nisbett and Ross, 1980: 265.)

It seems relatively clear that human decision making is ordinarily successful, not
because we really follow sophisticated rules for making decisions, but because of
other effects that impinge on realistic decisions. Nisbett and Ross (1980: Chap. 2)
list three important ones: (1) Although judgment heuristics are quite fallible, they
are far from useless and they are inexpensive. Given the number of decisions a
person makes in a lifetime and the cost of following normatively appropriate
strategies, it is unreasonable to expect a close approximation to formal scientific
methods of judgment. (2) Many domain-specific cues and causal models are acquired culturally. Even when these theories or behavioral norms are inappropriately
justified, they may often be quite utilitarian. Further, individuals often defer to
experts who have acquired a body of culturally transmitted insights relevant to
particular problems. (3) Many problems are solved collectively so that individual
errors are reduced.
We think that behavioral decision theory provides several kinds of evidence
about the strength of direct bias and guided variation.
1. The fact that individual human beings are not very good at solving novel
problems, or ones requiring statistical evaluation, suggests that complex cultural
adaptations are unlikely to be the result of individual learning alone. Many of the
most interesting human adaptations have advantages that are only of a statistical
nature. Consider how hard it is to evaluate whether a particular diet or mode of
building construction is beneficial. Given the limits of human cognition described
by behavioral decision theorists, it seems much more reasonable that individuals
should, at most, make minor improvements to what they have acquired culturally.
2. The fact that strong beliefs are based on small and/or biased samples means
that the decisions to adopt cultural variants will be very noisy; mere chance will
cause different individuals to choose different variants in the same environment.
This in turn suggests that guided variation and direct bias will often be weak.
3. The fact that beliefs are extremely resistant to change, even in the face of
overwhelming evidence, also provides direct evidence that the forces due to direct
bias and guided variation are weak.

We think these conclusions support our interpretation of the model results on
direct bias and guided variation. For a broad class of behavioral alternatives,
individual decision makers are unable or unwilling to make costly choice efforts.
Rather, they combine low-cost bias and guided variation with a considerable
reliance on culturally transmitted anchors for behavior. In theory, and apparently
in practice, this is the rational way to take advantage of a cultural system of
inheritance. When this is the case the dynamic properties of cultural transmission
may be important.
Conclusion

The sociobiological hypotheses are of great importance because they provide a
Standard against which to judge other theories of cultural evolution. Any satis-

Conclusion

171

factory account of culture in humans must tell us how posited structures of cultural
inheritance arose during the course of organic evolution. Sociobiologists assume
that, like other forms of phenotypic plasticity, social learning should generally act
to increase genetic fitness. Within the framework of dual inheritance theory, this

means that the guiding criteria which govern guided variation and direct bias have
been (and are being) shaped by natural selection so that these forces favor genetically advantageous traits. To be sure, they aver, humans like other animals often
make mistakes; bias and guided variation sometimes increase the frequency of
deleterious cultural variants. However, there is no reason to suppose that under-

standing phenotypic variation in humans should present any fundamentally new
problems. In particular, the dynamics of cultural transmission and evolution can
safely be ignored.
We believe it is unlikely that this will be true for all or even most human
behavioral variation. If the forces of bias and guided variation are strong, then there

will be little heritable cultural variation and therefore cultural transmission will be
of little importance. If they are not, the dynamics of cultural transmission will be
important. In this chapter we have reviewed the evidence that native human
decision-making inclinations and abilities, unaided by culturally inherited problemsolving techniques, are quite modest. In Chapter 3 we reviewed the evidence that
many important cultural traits exhibit substantial cultural inertia in the face of
substantial environmental change. These findings are hard to reconcile with the
action of strong direct bias and guided variation.
When direct bias and guided variation are weak, other forces can come into play.
We have already seen in the last two chapters that natural selection acting directly
on cultural variation can play an important role in cultural evolution. Chapters 7 and
8 present evidence that the forces of frequency-dependent and indirect bias can have
novel effects. It will not do to ignore the effects of cultural transmission until we
understand how these subtler forces work. We turn to this task in the next three
chapters.

6
The Natural Selection
of Cultural Variations:
Conflicts between Cultural
and Genetic Evolution
I may take this opportunity of remarking that my critics frequently assume that
I attribute all changes of corporeal structure and mental power exclusively to
the natural selection of variations as are often called spontaneous; whereas,

even in the first edition of the “Origin of Species,” I distinctly stated that great
weight must be attributed to the inherited effects of use and disuse, with respect
both to the mind and body.
Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man (1874),
Preface to the Second Edition

Darwin’s theory of evolution has survived the 100 or so years since his death
remarkably intact. Darwin’s view that the main driving force in evolution is the
gradual accumulation of small changes by natural selection still dominates modern
evolutionary thinking, and even many of Darwin’s analyses of specific evolutionary
problems,

such as sexual selection, have been recently “rediscovered”

after a

period of confusion and neglect (see Ghiselin, 1969). From the modern perspective, Darwin was guilty of only one really major error: throughout his life he
insisted that the inheritance of acquired variation commonly occurred in nature and
was fully compatible with his theory of evolution by natural selection. We now
know that with the exception of cultural species the inheritance of acquired variation does not occur in nature, and the modern neo-Darwinian theory of evolution
takes this fact as one of its central premises. Nowadays, the view that the transmission of acquired characters does occur is usually associated with mystical or
orthogenetic views of evolution which hold that forces other than natural selection
are important in shaping the direction of evolutionary change (e.g. Koestler, 1971).
Only relatively recently has Darwin’s idea of evolution by natural selection been
associated with the genetics of Mendel and Weismann. During the first two decades
of this century, evolutionary biology was divided into two warring camps. In one
were the “biometricians,” led by W. F. R. Weldon, and in the other were the
“Mendelians,” represented by William Bateson. The biometricians believed that
evolution proceeded via the natural selection of very small phenotypic differences
in quantitative characters. Pearson developed a mathematical theory of the effect
172

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

of selection on multivariate quantitative characters (Pearson,

173

1902) that closely

parallels the recent model of Lande (e.g. 1979), and an ingenious (although incorrect) theory of inheritance based on the notion that variation was maintained by the
transmission of what modern biologists would call “environmental variation” (Pearson, 1901). The biometricians rejected Mendelism because they believed that it
entailed large discontinuous changes in phenotype, and they considered this to be
incompatible with the Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection. In contrast, the Mendelians embraced the existence of Mendelian genetics in part because
they (incorrectly) believed that it was impossible for natural selection to create
major phenotypic change through the accumulation of small variations. For them
evolution proceeded via a series of “hopeful monsters.” It was not until Fisher
(1918) and Wright (1921) showed how Mendelian inheritance and quantitative
variation could be reconciled that Darwinism and Mendelism could be brought
together in a single theory, and perhaps two more decades passed before this
synthetic theory of evolution came to dominate in biology. (See Provine, 1971, for
a discussion of this controversy.)

The natural selection of cultural variations
We have reviewed this bit of the history of biology because we think it illustrates
that there is no necessary logical association between Darwin’s idea of evolution
by natural selection and the particular features of genetic inheritance. There are two
necessary conditions in order for natural selection to operate: (1) There must be
heritable variation in phenotype. (2) Phenotypic variation must be associated with
variation in individual survival and reproduction.
Whenever these two conditions are satisfied the phenotypic variants that have the
highest probability of being transmitted to the next generation will tend to increase
in number. We showed in Chapter 3 that cultural transmission creates heritable
phenotypic variation. To demonstrate that natural selection is a force in cultural
evolution, we must still show that individuals characterized by alternative cultural

variants differ in their probability of surviving and becoming effective models.
Later in this chapter we will present empirical evidence that this is indeed the case.
The fact that both genetic and cultural variation are subject to natural selection
does not mean that selection will favor the same phenotypic variants regardless of
the mode of transmission. When two inheritance systems have asymmetric life
cycles, selection may favor different phenotypic variants. We will see that for some
cultural traits, for example, those transmitted at an early age from parents to
offspring, the cultural variants that are favored by selection will be very similar to
those that would be favored if the trait were transmitted genetically. For example,
culturally transmitted food preferences may affect the survival and fecundity of
individuals, and selection will favor the variants that provide the best nutrition in
the local habitat. In this case the life cycle of cultural transmission is very similar
to that of genetic inheritance. However, for other cultural traits the life cycles of
cultural and genetic transmission may be quite asymmetric, and as a result, the
kinds of traits that have the highest probability of being transmitted to the next
generation may be quite different from those that maximize genetic fitness. For

174

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

example, career goals acquired during professional training may interfere with
.
raising a large family.
In this chapter we analyze the effect of natural selection on culturally inherited
aspects of behavior. We begin by distinguishing selection from the force of guided
variation and the forces that arise from biased transmission. Next, we review
empirical evidence that suggests that individuals characterized by different variants
of some cultural traits differ in their probability of successfully completing the life
cycle necessary for the transmission of those traits. We analyze a model of the
interaction of asymmetric cultural transmission and selection which will more
clearly demonstrate the effect of asymmetry. Finally, we consider how genetically
transmitted modifiers of the cultural life cycle might evolve. While there is a
general tendency for selection to favor symmetric life cycles, it is easy to imagine
plausible circumstances in which the evolutionary equilibrium is an asymmetric
system of cultural transmission. We conclude the chapter with a possible empirical
example of this effect.
Distinguishing natural selection from other forces
Biologists tend to apply the term “selection” to any process which (1) depends on
heritable variation in phenotype and (2) leads to systematic, directional change in
the frequency of different phenotypes in the population. A similarly inclusive
terminology could be employed here for culture, and, indeed, Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1981) have applied the term “cultural selection” to what we have called

directly biased transmission. We have elected to adopt a different terminology in
which we distinguish three classes of directional forces: the force of guided variation, the forces due to biased transmission, and natural selection.

Distinguishing natural selection from the force of guided variation is relatively
straightforward. The force of guided variation results from the cultural transmission
of the results of learning and acts to increase the frequency of traits that best satisfy
the learning criteria. Selection changes the frequency of different variants in the
population by culling some variants but not others. This causes the strength of
selection to depend on the amount of variation in the population. In contrast,
because learning creates new variants, the effect of the force of guided variation on
the mean phenotype in the population is independent of the amount of variation in
the population. (See Eq. 4.11 and the preceding text for a more complete discussion.)

Thus,

the force of guided variation

lies outside

even

the inclusive

definition given above.
The distinction between selection and the forces due to biased transmission is
more subtle. Like selection, biased transmission is a culling process that depends
on the variation present in the population. Indeed, the closest biological analog to
directly biased transmission is meiotic drive, a process which is usually categorized
as a kind of natural selection operating at the gametic level. The distinction between
selection and bias is based on the mechanism that is responsible for the culling
process. We have defined biased transmission in terms of transmission probabilities. The culling of different cultural variants that occurs during biased cultural
transmission results from the choices of individuals, particularly those made by
naive individuals when exposed to modeling events. As we have emphasized, this

Empirical Examples

175

means that biased transmission depends for its action on external criteria of desirability. We will use selection to refer to all the things that happen to an individual
because it performs a given behavior, and that, in turn, affect the probability that
the individual will be available as a model for naive individuals. No external
criterion is required to produce the effects of selection. Rather, two alternative traits

performed in the same environment need merely have differential effects on the life
chances of the individuals that perform them.
We believe that it is worthwhile to make this distinction because natural selection and bias have different roles in the explanation of culturally transmitted
adaptations. A model of cultural evolution which involves bias forces alone cannot
account for the origin of an adaptation unless an explanation can be provided for
how the biases themselves

arose.

In contrast,

the natural selection of cultural

variations is an autonomous force that does not depend on any external criteria.
Given the existence of a system of social learning and a pattern of social life in
which some individuals are more likely to be models than others, the natural
selection of cultural variations will necessarily occur. As we shall see, under some
circumstances this process can act to increase the frequency of variants that are
maladaptive in terms of genetic fitness.
Empirical Examples
For natural selection to change the frequency of different cultural variants, individuals characterized by some cultural variants must be more likely to become cultural
parents than individuals characterized by other variants. In this section, we examine
three empirical examples. In each of these examples the data indicate that: (1)
Individuals characterized by different variants of the culturally transmitted trait
have different probabilities of becoming cultural parents; that is, there is selection
of cultural variation. (2) There is reason to believe that forces of biased transmission and guided variation are weak compared to selection because the traits
seem to be transmitted without much choice or because it is difficult to believe that
people are aware of the consequences of their behavior.
We do not claim that these examples constitute proof of the importance of
natural selection on cultural variation. However, we do believe they demonstrate
that the natural selection of culturally transmitted variations could be an important
force in cultural evolution, and that models which focus upon the effects of natural

selection of culturally transmitted variations are as deserving of scientific attention
as the ones which focus on guided variation and biased transmission.

Cultural variation for mortality and fecundity

Rates of mortality and fecundity are the basic stuff of ordinary Darwinian (genetic)
fitness. When cultural transmission is symmetric, mortality and fecundity are also
directly related to cultural fitness. However, since an individual must ordinarily
survive long enough to occupy the social roles that are effective in horizontal and
oblique transmission, mortality rates also affect cultural fitness when the cultural
life cycle is asymmetric. For example, elderly people have important leadership
roles in many human societies. All other things being equal, cultural variants that

176

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

promote longevity are likely to be favored in such societies over variants that lead
to early death.
Demographers have collected a considerable amount of data that indicate that
culturally transmitted traits affect fecundity and mortality (for general reviews, see
United Nations, 1973; Petersen, 1975; Weller and Bouvier, 1981). These data
show fecundity and mortality vary as a function of nation, class, socioeconomic
status, ethnic group, religious affiliation, and so forth, and that culturally trans-

mitted traits affect many behaviors related to fecundity and mortality, including
subsistence production and public health, the details of age at marriage, desired
family size, and access to personal health care. Therefore, it seems very likely that
different cultural variants frequently have different fitnesses.
The effect of religious beliefs on fecundity and mortality provides a particularly
good example. Demographers have shown that measures of religious affiliation are
strongly correlated with fecundity and mortality. The effects of religion on fecundity and mortality seem to be clearly linked to culturally transmitted information:
religious beliefs frequently vary in their teachings about the desirability of children
and about the use of health-impairing substances like alcohol, tobacco, and drugs.
Some religions (e.g. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints) preach both
pronatalism and abstention. Others (e.g. the liberal Protestant churches of the
United States) have no objection to birth control or moderate use of alcohol. As we
saw in Chapter 3, parent-offspring similarities for religion are quite strong. Further,
few religious conversion decisions are likely to be madein order to increase fertility
or decrease mortality, at least ostensibly. Thus, there is a chance that a major
component of the generation-to-generation increase or decrease in one religious
doctrine relative to another is due to natural selection of vertically transmitted
cultural variation, episodes of mass conversion or mass apostasy aside.
How strong are these effects?

Janssen and Hauser (1981) conducted a reasonably

well controlled study of fertility among Catholics and non-Catholics. They present
longitudinal data from a large sample of men and women living in Wisconsin, in
which the effects of current and background religion and various measures of
education and socioeconomic status were analyzed using multiple regression techniques. Current religion had a stronger statistical effect than background religion.
Catholic men and women could both be expected to have about 0.5 more children
than non-Catholics, primarily because Catholics were more likely to have a third
or fourth child than were non-Catholics. Since the mean number of children for
males was 2.6 and for females 2.9 (in the total sample of roughly equal numbers
of Catholics and non-Catholics), this fertility difference represents quite strong
natural selection, assuming no countervailing effects on mortality. The data also
indicate that the effect of bias was much weaker. Although 11.6 percent of the
sample changed religions between high school and adulthood, the Catholics and
non-Catholics gained and lost nearly equal amounts. The Catholic group increased
slightly (2.5 percent) as a net result of conversions.
The effects of religious beliefs on mortality rates can be as striking as their
effects on fertility. Middle-class Protestant sects with strongly abstemious doctrines
like the Seventh-Day Adventists and the Latter-Day Saints show much lower
age-specific death rates than comparable groups outside these sects. For example,
McEvoy and Land (1981) report age-adjusted mortalities for members of the

Empirical Examples

177

Reformed Latter-Day Saints Church of Missouri about 20 percent below the rate
expected from control populations. In their study, death rates for Latter-Day Saints
members were especially low for lung cancer, pneumonia/influenza, and violent
death (including automobile accidents), categories that might be expected to be
lower if the clean-living doctrines of the Mormons were being followed.
There is also evidence that religious affiliation actually does affect behavior.
Jensen and Erickson (1979) report data on juvenile delinquency from Tucson,
Arizona. Their sample included Catholics, Protestants, and Mormons

who filled

out anonymous questionnaires regarding the number of delinquent acts committed.
Religious belief, extent of religious activity, and attendance at services were negatively correlated with most types of delinquent behavior, but the most consistent
correlations were for drinking and marijuana usage. There were also significant
differences between the denominations. In particular, Mormon youths reported
significantly less drinking and smoking, as might be expected from church doctrines. Interestingly enough, in this study the strongest effects observed between
religious and nonreligious individuals, and among denominations, were for
“victimless” delinquency. Crimes against people and property showed weaker
effects of religion. McEvoy and Land infer that these and other findings indicate
the specific doctrines preached by a given denomination are associated with specific
behavioral outcomes.
Food preferences
Certain variations in food preferences between human groups may result from the
natural selection of cultural variations. The evolution of human diets is almost
certainly affected by genetically transmitted biases that make some foods taste good
(Lumsden and Wilson, 1981: 38—43). In addition, it seems clear that people tend
to base their cuisine on crops that are easily grown in the local environment.
However, there are many dietary practices that are difficult to explain on the basis
of these kinds of directly biased transmission. Many dietary variations, such as the
highly variable addition of various pungent spices to food, seem to be acquired
tastes that are incorporated into diets even though they are distasteful to the uninitiated. More important, some of these dietary practices seem to be beneficial
adaptations; they have subtle, long-term effects that increase fitness. Because these
beneficial effects are often not closely related to the way different foods taste and
because they are often quite difficult to assess, even with the resources of modern
science, it is not obvious that they are the result of biased transmission or guided

variation. It seems at least as plausible to suppose that these items have reached
high frequencies in some societies because they are favored by natural selection
acting on cultural variation.
Solomon H. Katz and his associates have studied several traits affecting food
consumption and preparation that plausibly occur because of selection rather than
bias. The most convincing example is fava bean consumption in the circumMediterranean region (Katz and Schall, 1980). Fava beans are widely cultivated in
this region, despite the fact that they cause a severe, often fatal disease called
“fayvism” in certain sensitive individuals. The sensitive individuals are those who
have the X-linked gene for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) enzyme

178

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

deficiency, which in turn is in high frequency in many circum-Mediterranean
populations because it apparently confers resistance to malaria. Katz originally

hypothesized that populations with high frequencies of G-6-PD deficiency would
exhibit the lowest use of fava beans. However, fava bean consumption actually is
highest in those populations with the highest frequencies of G-6-PD deficiency. A
great variety of cultural beliefs have developed regarding fava beans during the long
period of their use in this region. Despite some recognition that they can have
harmful effects, fava beans continue to be eaten. This is especially curious since
there is no evidence that fava beans are more nutritious or easier to cultivate than
a number of alternate legume crops.
Katz and his colleagues present evidence that fava consumption is adaptive in
malaria-prone regions because the bean contains compounds that confer resistance
to malaria on individuals not protected by G-6-PD deficiency, and that this advantage compensates for the occurrence of favism in sensitive individuals. If this
hypothesis is correct, it is difficult to imagine that the consumption of fava beans
has been increased by direct bias or guided variation. There is no evidence that
those who eat fava beans understand the biological complexities involved or have
specific genetic biases (e.g. a distaste for the beans among G-6-PD deficient
individuals). Indeed, Katz’s hypothesis is not yet completely convincing, despite
the application of considerable effort, a testimony to the difficulty of applying
biases in complex cases.
A plausible hypothesis is that natural selection is acting on the cultural trait of
fava bean consumption much as it is acting on the G-6-PD locus. Individuals
characterized by beliefs that lead them to consume fava beans had a higher probability of surviving to adulthood and becoming cultural parents for the next generation than individuals who did not consume fava beans. The use of plant foods high

in secondary compounds of presently unknown or poorly understood effects is
widespread in human cuisines. Natural selection for such preferences could be an
important phenomenon.

Selection and asymmetric transmission

Only parents can transmit genes. Individuals occupying a variety of other social
roles—grandparents, siblings, heroes, teachers, people with high prestige—may be
involved in cultural transmission. When this is the case, we say that transmission
is asymmetric. Selection will act on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation
if (1) there is competition to occupy the roles that are effective in such transmission

and (2) individuals characterized by some cultural variants are more often winners

in this competition than individuals characterized by other variants. In the next
section we will consider a model of the important effects of selection on asymmetrically transmitted variation in more detail.
We think that the spread of the skills and values characteristic of modern
industrial society, first within the European West and now to the modernizing Third
World, provides one example of the effects of selection on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation. To make a case for this hypothesis we must show that (1)
cultural variation for the traits involved in industrial roles exists and is, in part at

Empirical Examples

179

least, transmitted asymmetrically and (2) some variants are disproportionately
successful in competition for social roles effective in horizontal and oblique transmission.
To simplify what must in reality be an extremely complex example of cultural
evolution, we will focus our discussion on a few traits. Let us first consider a trait

which psychologists refer to as “cognitive style.” Cognitive style is measured by
a number of different tests. The embedded figures test is typical. Subjects are given
a number of cards with complex geometrical forms which have simpler reference
forms embedded in them. The task is to find the simple form concealed in the more
complex one. A person’s degree of “‘field independence” is scored by measuring the
time required to complete a number of such tasks. The theory behind the measurement holds that the degree of field dependence is a measure of a fundamental
attribute of cognition, the ability to analyze problems by dividing them into articulated parts (field independent) as opposed to the ability to interpret complex
patterns as a whole (field dependent).
These measures of cognitive style are interesting in the context of modernization
because traditional agricultural societies and Western industrial societies apparently
differ in the average amount of field dependence. There is a large body of crosscultural data about the occurrence of different variants and their correlates. (For
reviews, see Berry, 1976; Witkin and Berry, 1975; Werner, 1979; and Witkin and

Goodenough, 1981.) These data indicate that high field independence is found in
two otherwise sharply contrasting groups: loosely organized, nomadic foodforaging peoples and the middle class of industrialized societies, including the
modern elites of the Third World. Members of tightly organized, strongly authoritarian, hierarchical agricultural societies tend to score on the field-dependent end
of the dimension. The members of the working class of industrial states exhibit
lower field independence than members of the middle class.
Cognitive style, as measured by such tests, is correlated with a number of other
psychological attributes. The most interesting correlate for our purposes is its
relationship to social behavior. The data show that field-dependent individuals are
more sensitive to social cues than field-independent ones. As a result,
field-dependent people reach cooperative agreement with others more easily and are
less individualistic and competitive in social situations than the field-independent
individuals (Werner,

1979: 186).

Witkin and Berry argue that different ecological and sociological situations favor
different cognitive styles. The tasks of food foragers and of the occupants of
managerial and entrepreneurial roles in industrial societies require a good deal of
independent, analytical evaluation of problems, while traditional agricultural societies require close cooperation and deference to authority. Studies quite outside the
research tradition of Witkin and Berry give a similar picture of the relationship
between role demands and values, at least among occupational classes in industrial
societies (Kohn, 1981).
It is reasonable to infer from these data that the industrialization or modernization of an agricultural society of the pre-industrial West or of a contemporary
Third World society involves, among other things, an increase in the proportion of
the population scoring high on field independence. Could the hypothesis of asymmetrical transmission and selection fit the observed patterns?

180

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

1. Heritable cultural variation for cognitive style exists. The observed variation

in cognitive style within societies is fairly substantial (Berry, 1976: 150). The fact

that parental rearing practices are correlated with cognitive styles in children suggests that vertical transmission of cognitive style is important. Rearing styles that
are warm and encourage children’s independence are associated with
field-independent cognitive styles, while styles which emphasize punishment and
close conformance to social norms are associated with field dependence (Werner,
1979: 180-181). There is also good evidence that asymmetric transmission is
effective in the transmission of cognitive style. Acculturation and, in particular,
formal schooling have been shown to affect the degree of field independence
(Berry, 1976; Werner, 1979: 184). School, work experience, and an exposure to
mass media generally appear to be less important than parental influence but are
nonetheless significant.
2. Variation for cognitive style is associated with differential success in achieving social roles effective in horizontal and oblique transmission. Cognitive style
was first investigated in Western societies where high field independence is associated with middle-class status. Witkin and Berry’s adaptation hypothesis has grown
out of these and similar data from modernizing situations. The independent, analytical, competitive individualism of those who score high on field independence
suits them for success in school, and school success is closely correlated with
subsequent job status (Jencks et al., 1972).
These data suggest the following hypothesis to explain the increase in field
independence with modernization: (1) A modernizing agricultural society begins
with a population scoring low on field independence, but with considerable variation. (2) In the modernizing situation, the field-independent individuals are more
likely to do well in school and subsequently to become teachers, business owners
or managers, bureaucrats, and so on. Old elite roles favoring more field-dependent
cognitive styles become, at least proportionately, less important. (3) The new
field-independent elites transmit their values and skills to some extent horizontally
and obliquely to their employees and pupils. Other traits, including disposition
toward innovation and job aspirations, are also expected to be transmitted in the
same way.
The models developed in the next section indicate that selection on asymmetrically transmitted variation can be a very powerful force, even when rates of
horizontal and oblique transmission are modest, as long as the competition for
access to the roles effective in this transmission is severe and selective. Thus it is
plausible that the hypothesized mechanism could lead to rapid increase in the
frequency of the variant of field independence.
Models of Natural Selection

The evidence cited in the previous section suggests that culturally transmitted traits
may often be subject to natural selection. In order to understand how natural
selection affects the frequency of different phenotypic variants in a population, we
will analyze several simple models of the natural selection of cultural variation.
When the life cycle of cultural transmission is symmetric to genetic transmission,

Models of Natural Selection

181

these models can be borrowed directly from population genetics. We have already
analyzed such models of the natural selection of culturally transmitted traits in
Chapters 4 and 5. As we shall see, however, asymmetric cultural life cycles lead
to effects that are not present in conventional genetic models.
A dichotomous trait with a symmetric life cycle
We will begin by adding selection to the very simple model of the vertical transmission of a dichotomous cultural trait introduced in Chapter 3. Suppose that a
dichotomous trait is acquired culturally from the genetic parents at an early age.
This trait takes on two variants, c and d. The frequency of the variant c in the pool
of cultural parents is p. In Chapter 3, we showed that if the transmission rule is
linear and if the formation of sets of cultural parents is nonselective, then the
frequency of the cultural variant c is unaffected by cultural transmission. Let p’ be
the frequency of c in the population just after cultural transmission in the next
generation. Then

Dep

(6.1)

Now we add an episode of natural selection. Suppose that individuals characterized by different cultural variants differ in the probability that they become parents.
For example, the cultural trait might be one of the practices discussed above that
affects individual survivorship, and individuals with one variant are more likely to
survive to adulthood than individuals characterized by the other variant. It also
might be that the cultural trait affects the ability of an individual to acquire the
wealth and social position necessary to marry and have children. Let the probability
that an individual with cultural variant c becomes a parent be W. and that for
individuals with variant d be W;. We will refer to W. and W, as the “cultural

fitnesses” of the variants c and d. In this case the cultural fitnesses of the variants
are identical to their Darwinian or ordinary reproductive fitnesses, but this will not
always be the case. (As in Chap. 5, we restrict attention to viability selection for

simplicity.)
We now want to calculate the frequency of the variant c in the pool of parents,
that is, after selection takes place. Suppose that the size of the entire population
before selection is a large number, N’. Then the number of individuals with variant

c in the pool of parents, N¢, is
Probability ac
No

individual

becomes a parent

Total number of c
x

individuals

before selection

or

Na OV.) op NS)

(6.2)

Similarly, the number of individuals characterized by the variant d, N eas

Nu = Wa(1 — p’)N’

(6.3)

182

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

The fraction of parents with the cultural variant c, p”, is simply

P

Ui,

Ne

NU +N

(6.4)

Now we can use Equations 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4 to write the frequency of the

variant c during one generation, p”, as a function of the frequency of c among
parents of the previous generation:

2

7 panera! pW.
kl Sa ret
(l= sD) Wastes p We

6.5

To get an intuitive feeling for what this recursion means, consider Figure 6.1 where
we have plotted the change in the frequency of c over one generation,
Ap = p” — p, as a function of p. First, notice that Ap is either positive for all
values of p or negative for all values of p. Furthermore, it is positive if W./Wa > 1.
This means that the frequency of c always increases if W. > W, and decreases if
W. < Wg. In other words, the cultural variant with the highest cultural fitness

increases. Also notice that the magnitude of Ap is largest for p = 4 and approaches
zero as p approaches zero or one. This illustrates the fact that the action of selection
depends on there being variability in the population. The variance of the phenotypic
values (assigning a phenotypic value | to c and 0 to d, as in Chap. 4) is p(1 — p),
which is a maximum at p = 3 and zero at both of the boundaries.

Fig. 6.1 The change in the frequency of cultural variant c, Ap, due to natural selection as a
function of p. When the fitness of variant c, W., is greater than that of the alternative variant,
Wa, Ap is positive for all values of p. When W. < W4g, it is negative for all values of p.

The parent-teacher model

So far we have assumed that parents enculturate their children and that no other
unrelated individuals are available to the naive child as models. Thus (as long as
opportunities for extramarital reproduction are negligible), the phenotypic variants
favored by selection acting on culturally transmitted variation are the same as those
that would be favored if the trait were genetically transmitted. However, as we have
seen, the empirical evidence suggests that for some traits, particularly those that
typically are acquired at a later age, individuals other than the genetic parents are

Models of Natural Selection

183

important in socialization. When this is true the effect of selection on the frequency
of the different variants in the population is more complicated, and, under some
circumstances, it can favor different phenotypic variants than would be favored if
the trait were genetically transmitted.
To understand how this can happen we generalize the simple model analyzed
above to include the possibility that individuals other than the genetic parents are
important in enculturation. We accomplish this in two stages: first, we consider a

very simple model in which children are enculturated by two kinds of individuals,
their parents and teachers. The parent-teacher model allows us to understand the
basic effect of asymmetric life cycles in the context of a very simple model. Then
we analyze a more general multiple-parent model.
Once again we consider the evolution of a dichotomous cultural trait with two
variants, c and d. In the parent-teacher model, we assume that for this trait each
naive offspring is enculturated by two individuals, one of his genetic parents, say
the mother, and a teacher. We suppose that cultural transmission proceeds according to the linear rule given in Table 6.1, that is, the parent has weight A and the
teacher 1 — A.
Table 6.1 The conditional probabilities of acquiring cultural variants c and d given
the cultural variants that characterize the parent and the teacher
Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant
Parent

Teacher

Cc

d

c
c
d
d

Cc
d
c
d

1
A

0
il = AN
A
1

=

AN

As in the previous model, we suppose that individuals characterized by the two
different cultural variants have different probabilities of becoming a parent. The
probability for variant c is W. and for variant d, W;. We also suppose that individuals with different cultural variants have different probabilities of becoming teachers. Let ©, be the probability that an individual with the variant c becomes a
teacher, and (, the probability for individuals characterized by variant d. This
means that there are two different, potentially conflicting, cultural selection pro-

cesses. One process selects among individuals allowing some to become parents
and thereby enculturate children, and a second process selects individuals who will
become teachers and also be in a position to enculturate children.
To determine the kinds of phenotypes that result from this kind of selection
process we will derive a recursion for the frequency of the cultural variant c. Let
p be the frequency of c among offspring just after cultural transmission. First we
want to compute the frequency of c among parents and teachers. From the symmetric model, the frequency of c among parents, p’, is

=

P=

ed pW.
DC le

pW + pW.

(6.6)

184

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

be
By analogy the frequency of the cultural variant c among teachers, p’, must

an

P=

po.

p)Qs + pO.

(6.7)

The frequency of c after transmission in the next generation, p”, is given by the
equation
(6.8)
» _ .,.*| Probability offspring is c given |
both teacher and parent are c
P

ee

«| Probability offspring is c given
Ss) fee is c and teacher is d

Has

___,,.+| Probability offspring is c given
2? pee is d and teacher is c

;

Assuming that sets of cultural parents are formed at random and that transmission
is according to Table 6.1, this equation becomes

Il] + p'd — pA] + A= p)pli— Al
p’ = p'’p

(6.9)

By writing the [1] in the first term as [A + (1 — A)], Equation 6.9 can be
simplified to

p’=Ap'+(1-—A)p

(6.10)

Equation 6.10 is a very important result. It says that the frequency of the cultural
variant c after transmission is the weighted average of the frequencies of c among
parents and teachers, where the weights are the relative importances of parents and
teachers in the transmission of the cultural trait in question. To see why this is
important, suppose that individuals with cultural variant c are more likely to
become teachers while those with the cultural variant d are more likely to become
parents. Thus the frequency of c individuals will be higher among the pool of
teachers and the frequency of d individuals will be higher among parents. Given
Equation 6.10, it seems plausible that if teachers were important enough, then c
could increase in the population even though d individuals are assumed to have
higher genetic fitness.
We can make this intuitive argument more precise by using Equations 6.6 and
6.7 in combination with Equation 6.10 to derive a recursion for the frequency of
the variant c. To simplify this process we will once again suppose that selection is
weak. In the context of a dichotomous trait this means that W, ~ W. and 0, ~ Qy.

We can express this mathematically as follows. Let

W./Wa = 1 + s

0./Oa=1+6

aah

(6.11)

where s and o are small enough that we can ignore terms of order s* and o?. The
parameters s and o measure the selection advantage (or disadvantage) of c in the

Models of Natural Selection

185

Box 6.1 Combining Equations 6.6 and 6.11 results in the following expression for
the frequency of c among parents, p’:

Plates)
1 sp

If s is small enough that we can ignore terms of order s*, then

Pea Mts) leo spilAsp) atin}

pt spl = p)

Similarly, if o is small enough to ignore terms of order o7 then

p* = p(l + o){1 — op + (op)? +... } =p + op(l — p)
Then combining these two expressions with Equation 6.10 yields

p” = Alp + sp(1 — p)] + (1 — A)[p + op(1 — p)]
= p+ p(l — p)[As + (1 — A)o]
two selection processes.

So, for instance, if o > 0 and s < 0, individuals with

variant c are more likely to become teachers but less likely to become parents. It
is shown in Box 6.1 that with this assumption the recursion for p is

Pes pti pl, = piAs. Gd. Ajo)

(6.12)

As is illustrated in Figure 6.2, this recursion has a very simple interpretation.
The term [As + (1 — A)o] is a sort of “effective selective advantage.” It is the

selective advantage of variant c in the selective processes that cull potential parents
and teachers, weighted by the importance of parents and teacher in enculturation.
Ifthis term is positive the variant c always increases, and if it is negative the reverse

We

+ 1=Ajoo 0

Wig +(1-A)o<0O
Fig. 6.2 The change in the frequency of cultural variant c, Ap, as a result of natural selection
the
acting on both symmetric and asymmetric components of the cultural life cycle. When

variant c
effective selection advantage of variant c, As + (1 — Ajo, is greater than zero,
decreases.
c
variant
negative,
is
it
When
increases.

186

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

occurs. This means that even if a cultural variant is maladaptive from the point of
view of Darwinian fitness (i.e. s < 0), it can still increase in frequency.

A more complex model
Clearly this model is extremely stylized. Children are usually enculturated by a
variety of different kinds of individuals, and different children may be exposed to
different numbers and kinds of parents. To show that these complications do not
necessarily alter the qualitative effects of asymmetric life cycles that were explored
with the parent-teacher model, we will analyze a more complex model of enculturation.
Suppose that each child has a set of cultural parents who occupy different “social
roles.” These social roles may include that of the “mother” and the “father,” who,

depending on the society, may or may not be the genetic parents of the offspring.
Other important roles may be reserved for relatives, for example, grandparents in
traditional Chinese society or the mother’s brother in many matrilineal societies.
Finally, totally unrelated individuals may play an important role, the shaman, the
big man, or the leader of the secret society in traditional societies, or the priest,
coach, or teacher in Western ones.

It seems unlikely that every child will be exposed to individuals occupying every
possible social role. For instance, some children will have grandparents while
others will not. To accommodate this situation within the model, we assume that
a given naive individual is only exposed to a subset 7; of all possible roles. Let
Prob(t;) be the probability that an offspring is exposed to the subset 1;. This
probability can depend on the roles themselves. So, for example, it could specify
that a child is exposed to the role of father or of stepfather, but not both. This
probability cannot depend on the cultural variant of the individuals occupying the
roles. This introduces indirect bias effects which we will treat in Chapter 8.
We suppose that individuals occupying different social roles have different
importances in enculturation for any particular trait. For instance, for traits that are
acquired at an early age, roles involved in primary child care are likely to be
important. On the other hand, for skills that are acquired upon becoming adult,
roles like teacher or military leader may be of primary importance. To model this
in the context of a dichotomous character, we assume a linear cultural transmission

tule as in Chapter 3. We assign the phenotypic value X, to the kth parent where

_ | 1 if parent k is c
*
f if parent k is d

Re)

This means that in each set of cultural parents we assign a phenotypic value to each
social role. Since, in general, there may be-more social roles than there are parents,
this means that we are assigning phenotypic values to nonexistent parents. We shall
see, however, that this does not make any difference.
As with the linear model developed in Chapter 3, we assume that an individual
occupying the kth social role has a weight Ay. Next we define a new quantity Ayj
as follows:

AxUtif k belongsae ete
to7,
ay ~=|*l0ifk
does not belong to 7;

(6.14)

Models of Natural Selection

187

The probability that an offspring acquires cultural variant c given that it is exposed
to cultural parents with the set of social roles t; and who have phenotypic values
Xi, ...

, X, is assumed to be

Probi(Gjapoxr,

we cus Xa) =

Dk Ayj Xx

(6.15)

2k Ay

This rule says that the actual weight of an individual occupying social role k in a
particular set of cultural parents is the raw weight, A,, normalized by the average
weights of all the individuals in that set of cultural parents.
We suppose that the attainment of any of the social roles involves surviving a
culling process analogous to natural selection. This means (1) that not everyone
becomes

a grandfather,

a big man,

or what have you,

and (2) that different

phenotypic variants have different probabilities of attaining any particular social
role. Once again this may be because different variants have different probabilities
of surviving to the age at which an individual can occupy a particular role, or it may
be that particular skills or accomplishments are affected by culturally inherited
factors. In both cases, the phenotypic variants that maximize the probability of
attaining one role may not be the variants that have the best chance of attaining
some different role. In the context of the simple dichotomous model we have
analyzed, let ., be the probability that an individual with cultural variant c attains

social role k, and let 4 be the probability that an individual characterized by d
attains social role k.
With these assumptions we can calculate a recursion for the frequency of the
cultural variant c in the population. Suppose that the frequency of c just after
cultural transmission is p. First, we calculate the frequency c in the pool of
individuals who achieve social role k in adulthood, px:
(ee

(QA

Be

»

Ogp te Oat

If sets of cultural parents are formed at random,
individual acquires variant c is given by
1

the probability that a naive

1

>) Prob (Cite Seem

p’ = oe Probisy) p> re
x (Prot(X7) bee

5)

X5=0

X,=0

j

(6.16)

p)

(6.17)

Etob 0x)

By exchanging the order of summation, this can be rewritten as follows:
1

p = ey if
X,=0

1

eS

Be S > ex

Prob. Xq) een

(Xa)

(6.18)

x=0)0k

where

Ay = > Prob(7)) (Ax/2 Ajj)
J

(6.19)

The parameter A, represents the importance of parents in the kth social role
averaged over all possible sets of cultural parents according to the frequency with
which each set of cultural parents occurs. It is easy to show that Equation 6.18

188

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

becomes
p’ =

>

Ay Pk

(6.20)

Ki

Combining equations 6.16 and 6.20 gives us a recursion for the frequency of the
cultural variant c in the population. This recursion has the same general properties
as the parent-teacher model. In particular, if we define .o, = O4/Qa — 1 (in
analogy with o and s above) as the selection advantage of variant c in attaining role
k and assume that selection is weak, then 6.20 becomes
n

i) Sonal = iy (S Avo.)

(6.21)

k=1

The sum is the selection advantage of variant c in role k averaged over all social
roles, with each role being weighted by its importance in socialization. Equation
6.21 says that the variant c will increase in frequency if this quantity is positive and
decrease if it is negative.
It is important to notice that the influence of a particular role on the overall
selection advantage of a cultural variant depends on the strength of selection in
attaining that role as well as the importance of the role. Given that the competition
to attain some social roles like leader or big man may be very intense, it is possible
that these roles may have a very important influence on the dynamics of the
distribution of cultural variants.

The Evolution of Nonparental Transmission
The evolutionary origin and continued existence of asymmetric cultural transmission create a puzzle. The models analyzed in the last two sections suggest that
natural selection acting on culturally transmitted variation will increase the frequency of variants which enhance cultural fitness. When cultural transmission is
asymmetric, these variants may be different from those that maximize genetic
fitness. Thus, all other things being equal, one would expect asymmetric cultural
transmission often to be maladaptive. Nonetheless, the empirical evidence indicates that cultural transmission in humans is quite asymmetric, at least for some
characters. This suggests that it might be fruitful to ask the question, Does asymmetric cultural transmission have some benefits that compensate for its intrinsic
costs?

Indirect benefits of asymmetric cultural transmission

The most obvious answer to this question is that asymmetric transmission may be
a by-product of many other adaptations. The kinds of individuals who will be
available as models will depend on virtually all aspects of the social and economic
system of the group in question. Groups specializing in trade or warfare may be

characterized by the absence of males from the household, while in pastoral groups
boys may spend long periods with their fathers following herds. Resource distribu-

The Evolution of Nonparental Transmission

189

tion and the political system will determine whether settlement is concentrated or
dispersed, and hence the availability of models outside the family. Clearly, this list
could be elaborated endlessly. In each case, the kinds of individuals that are
available as models depend on other aspects of society which are important from
an adaptive point of view; thus we would expect that the cultural life cycle cannot
be made more symmetric without paying some penalty. For example, in a group
specializing in trade a father might have to forgo lucrative trading opportunities in
order to have a greater role in socialization.
Direct benefits of asymmetric cultural transmission
An individual’s genetic parents represent a very small sample of the population
from which they were drawn. Expanding the set of cultural parents may improve
a naive individual’s chances of acquiring the most favorable variant in two ways:
If it is possible to identify favorable variants via direct or indirect bias, increasing
the number of cultural parents may be adaptive insofar as it increases the chance
that the set of cultural parents will include the most favorable variant. Expanding
the set of cultural parents also enables the naive individual to get a better estimate
of the distribution of variants in the population as a whole. This information is
useful in choosing a variant under a wide variety of circumstances. In what follows
we discuss each of these effects in more detail.
Increasing the number of cultural parents makes direct bias more effective. To
see why, remember that direct bias can be thought of as a process in which
individuals choose from among the variants to which they are exposed. Other things
equal, one would expect that increasing the number of cultural parents would
increase the number of different variants to which an offspring is exposed, and thus
increase the chance of selecting the best variant.
This intuitive argument is supported by the models which were discussed in the
last chapter. There we analyzed a model in which offspring acquired a quantitative
cultural character from n cultural parents via the directly biased transmission rule.

The effect of biased transmission was to move the mean cultural variant in the
population toward the variant favored by the bias an amount AX, where

AX = (1 — 1/n,)Cov(Z,B(Z))

(6.22)

The covariance term represents the effects of the strength of the bias and the amount
of variation in the population (see Eq. 5.10 and surrounding discussion for more
details). The parameter n, is the effective number

of cultural parents.

As n,

increases, the value of AX also increases.
Now suppose that there are two genotypes in the population, one which causes
its bearers to have an average effective number of cultural parents equal to n,, and
a second which causes its bearers to have a larger effective number of cultural
parents, n*. Equation 6.22 says that individuals with the second genotype will on
average be closer to the variant favored by the bias than individuals with the first
genotype. Assuming that the bias increases the frequency of adaptive variants, this
means that individuals with more cultural parents will on average have higher
genetic fitness. This is not an artifact of the quantitative model; an n parent
dichotomous model yields a qualitatively similar result.

190

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

effecIncreasing the number of cultural parents also makes indirect bias more
easy
is
it
,
tive. We will not examine indirect bias in detail until Chapter 8. However
indirect
is
there
to understand why asymmetric life cycles may be adaptive when

is constrained to be
bias. Dad may be a lousy hunter; if cultural transmission

to expend
symmetric, his sons either will be stuck with his techniques or will have

be symmetric,
the effort to learn better ones. If transmission is not constrained to

they can choose their models from among all the hunters in the village and thereby
so
greatly increase their chances of acquiring the best variants of trap design and
on.
Asymmetric life cycles also may be adaptive because larger sets of cultural
parents provide the naive individual with better information about the distribution
of cultural variants in the population. For example, in the case of quantitative
characters and blending inheritance, increasing the sample size decreases the variation in the offspring’s estimate of the mean phenotype in the population. Since
several forces tend to cause the mean phenotype in the population to be the optimal
phenotype, increasing the number of cultural parents will increase fitness in these
conditions.
Having more than two cultural parents also makes frequency-dependent bias
possible. When there is frequency-dependent bias the naive individual uses the
frequency with which different cultural variants occur as indicators of their merit.
As we will see in Chapter 7, when transmission is biased in favor of the more
common variant, it acts like what statisticians call “robust estimators” to reduce the

chance that a naive individual will acquire badly maladaptive cultural variants from
models who are drawn from the extremes of the distribution of cultural variants.

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias and Guided Variation

In this chapter we have been building an argument that natural selection acting on
asymmetric cultural transmission can cause human behavior to diverge systematically from the predictions of sociobiological theory. So far the argument has had
two parts: (1) Natural selection acting on culturally transmitted variation may
increase the frequency of genetically maladaptive variants if the cultural life cycle
is asymmetric. (2) There are good reasons to believe that natural selection acting
on genes might favor cultural transmission with asymmetric life cycles.
It is important to emphasize that we are only arguing that it is possible that
asymmetric cultural transmission has this effect. Even at that, the argument is still
incomplete. The fact that natural selection acting on an asymmetric system of
cultural inheritance may often favor maladaptive variants does not necessarily mean
that these variants will increase in frequency; the effect of selection may be opposed
by other forces like direct bias and guided variation. Indeed, as long as there is a
genetic basis for the forces of guided variation and biased transmission, there will
a tendency for some combination of these forces to evolve so as to correct distorting
effects of asymmetric

cultural life cycles.

Some

authors

(e.g. Durham,

1976;

Lumsden and Wilson, 1981) have argued that any important deviations of human
behavior from what is genetically adaptive will eventually be eliminated in this
way.

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias and Guided Variation

191

We think it is plausible, however, that in many situations direct bias and guided
variation will not evolve to compensate for the effects of asymmetric transmission
completely. In a spatially varying environment, migration can increase the frequency of maladaptive variants in each local habitat. In the last chapter we showed
that in such an environment,

selection in favor of biases which

increased the

frequency of locally favored variants was rather weak. If the cost of evaluating
different cultural variants (necessary for the action of bias) was high enough, the
bias would not evolve. A parallel argument can be made in the case of asymmetric
transmission. Like migration, the combination of selection and an asymmetric life
cycle can cause the frequency of maladaptive cultural variants to increase. We will
shortly show that selection on the determinants of bias is also weak when the
combination of asymmetric transmission and selection maintains maladaptive variants, and if bias is costly, correcting biases will not evolve.

Even if bias and guided variation do evolve so that they correct the effects of
asymmetric transmission, there is no guarantee that they will be effective. Unlike
maladaptive variants due to migration, the ones that result from asymmetric life
cycles are coevolving with the genetic system. Under some circumstances, cultural
evolution will tend to compensate for the effects of genetic evolution, and a kind
of “arms race” will result. For example, suppose selection on cultural variation
favors values and beliefs that lead to small families and selection on genetic
variation favors desires that lead to large families. Then, selection on genes might
increase the desire for children. In response, cultural selection might favor even
more extreme beliefs about the appropriate family size. Genetic selection might
again increase the desire for children, and so on.
In the remainder of this section we consider these two processes in the context
of two simple models. First we consider the interaction of direct bias, natural
selection, and asymmetric life cycles in a spatially varying environment. Then we
analyze a model in which there is an arms race between cultural and genetic
evolution.

Direct bias and asymmetric cultural life cycles
To investigate the interaction of bias and natural selection on asymmetrically
transmitted cultural variation, we make use of the model of the genetic modification
of bias discussed in the last chapter. There we assumed that (1) there were two
culturally transmitted variants, c and d; (2) individuals with variant c were assumed

to have a higher probability of becoming cultural parents in habitat 1 while individuals with variant d were more likely to become cultural parents in habitat 2; (3)

there was a genetic locus that affected the magnitude and direction of the bias; and
(4) the probability that any given individual became a genetic parent and the
probability that the same individual became a cultural parent were equal, or, in
other words, the cultural and genetic life cycles were symmetric. We then determined the conditions under which an allele which codes for unbiased cultural
transmission (the unbiased allele) resists invasion by an allele which codes for bias

in favor of genetically adaptive traits in each of the habitats (the general purpose

bias allele).

192

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

In this section, we modify the model so that it represents a situation in which the
cultural life cycle is asymmetric. Once again, assume that there are two culturally
transmitted variants and two genetic variants. We adopt the notation used in
Chapter 5, that is, cultural variants c and d are denoted by numerical value X, which

equals 1 and 0, respectively, and genetic variants are denoted by the numerical
value G, which can equal 0 (the unbiased allele) or 1 (the general purpose bias

allele). Here we only consider the case of general purpose biases. It is assumed that
individuals with the unbiased allele are characterized by unbiased transmission,
while individuals with the bias allele have a transmission rule that is biased in favor
of the cultural variant that maximizes the probability of becoming a genetic parent.
To model the effects of asymmetric life cycles we need only to change the
pattern of cultural fitnesses in the way shown in Table 6.2. The top table gives the
probability that different individuals characterized by various combinations of
cultural and genetic variants become genetic parents. All other things equal, cultural variant c has higher genetic fitness in habitat | and cultural variant d has higher
genetic fitness in habitat 2. However, as shown in the bottom table, we assume that

the probabilities of becoming a cultural parent follow exactly the opposite pattern:
individuals characterized by cultural variant c are more likely to become cultural
parents in habitat 2, and individuals with cultural variant d are more likely to
become cultural parents in habitat 1.
This is quite an extreme way to combine spatially varying environments with the
effects of asymmetric life cycles because the forces of natural selection acting on
genes and on culture are always opposed. This extreme model is useful because it
represents the case in which bias is most likely to evolve. When selection on
cultural and selection on genetic variation work together, then selection for biases
would be weakened. This extreme model also is mathematically very similar to the
model analyzed in Chapter 5 and therefore is very easy to analyze.
Once again, we want to know under what conditions a general purpose bias is
favored relative to unbiased transmission. It can be shown that the frequency of the
bias allele will increase whenever the following condition holds:

{(1 — p)ps}b > z

(6.23)

where (as in Chap. 5) p is the frequency of the cultural variant with the highest
genetic fitness in each habitat. The left-hand side of 6.23 represents the benefits of
biased transmission and is the product of three terms: b, which measures the
strength of the transmission bias; s, which measures the difference in genetic fitness

of the two culturally transmitted variants; and (1 — p)p, which measures the
amount of cultural variation in the population. The right-hand side of 6.23 is the
cost of biased transmission, z. If the benefits of biased transmission are greater than
its costs, it will be favored by selection.

Notice that Condition 6.23 is exactly the same as the expression derived under
the assumption that the genetic and cultural life cycles were symmetric (i.e. Condition 5.20, Chap. 5). The evolution of alleles controlling bias depends only on the
magnitude of (1 — p)p, the amount of cultural variation. For a given amount of
cultural variation, its source is irrelevant. Of course, the nature of the selective
forces will usually affect the amount of cultural variation. In the symmetric model
selection and bias always acted in concert to increase the frequency of the cultural
variant that had the higher genetic fitness, while in the asymmetric model they will

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias and Guided Variation

193

Table 6.2a Probability of becoming a genetic parent in habitat 1 (i.e. genetic
fitness)
Cultural
Variant

0

Genotype
1

0
1

1
oes

eer/
lee
iactaS

Ripe gee Probability of becoming a cultural parent in habitat | (i.e. cultural
tness
Cultural
Variant

0

Genotype
1

0
1

Ih ae Gy
1

ll = gesr @
lez

be opposed. Surprisingly, this difference can have the effect of making it easier or
harder for the bias allele to increase in frequency.
To see this, consider the case of a population in which all individuals have the
unbiased allele. In this case the equilibrium frequency of the favored variant will
be determined only by the strength of selection on cultural variation, s in the
symmetric model and o in the asymmetric model. Recall that selection works with
equal strength but in opposite directions in the two habitats in both models. This
means that as selection becomes strong relative to migration, the frequency of
variants with the higher cultural fitness approaches one. In the symmetric model
this is also the variant with higher genetic fitness, while in the asymmetric model
the variant with lower genetic fitness increases in frequency. The effects of this
situation on the amount of cultural variation are shown graphically in Figure 6.3.
Notice that the amount of cultural variation decreases as selection gets stronger, the
direction of the selection does not matter. This means that the benefits of biased
transmission will decrease as the strength of selection on cultural variation increases. In this simple model there is no relationship between the asymmetry of the
life cycle and the strength of selection in favor of biased transmission.
Several caveats are in order, however. First, when selection on cultural variation
favors maladaptive cultural variants, the evolution of biased transmission will

usually increase the amount of cultural variation in the population, which in turn
increases the strength of selection in favor of biased transmission. Thus, if the

biased allele can increase when it is rare, it will always go to fixation. In contrast,

when selection and bias work in the same direction, increasing the frequency of the
bias allele weakens the selection in favor of bias, and a polymorphic equilibrium
is possible. Second, in quantitative models there is a general tendency for selection
on cultural asymmetrically transmitted variation to increase the strength of selection
in favor of biased transmission. It is possible to construct models of quantitative
characters in which asymmetric transmission reduces the selection in favor of
biased transmission, but there is a general tendency for asymmetry to have an
opposite effect. Finally, the strength of selection favoring guided variation will
usually increase if the cultural life cycle is asymmetric, although, again, it is easy
to construct models in which the opposite occurs.

194

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

ASYMMETRIC

SYMMETRIC

Pe

s6 (1-6)

p
Fig. 6.3 Shows that asymmetric cultural transmission does not necessarily increase the strength
of selection in favor of direct biases that favor genetically advantageous variants. The strength
of selection favoring a general purpose bias allele is sp(1 — p). In both panels this quantity is
plotted as a function of p. We also assumed that variant c has higher genetic fitness. In the left
panel we assumed that cultural selection also acts to increase p in the local environment.
Selection and immigration balance at the equilibrium value p. The resulting strength of selection
in favor of a general purpose bias is given by the height of the curve at p. In the right panel
we assumed that cultural selection acts to decrease p. If selection is weak so that the resulting
equilibrium is f2, then the selection favoring direct bias is stronger than in the symmetric case.
If, however, selection is strong so that the equilibrium is f;, then selection favoring direct biases
is weaker than in the symmetric case.

A “Freudian” model

So far we have only considered the effect of genes which modify guided variation
or directly biased transmission. It is also possible for genes to influence expressed
behavior without creating or modifying the forces of cultural evolution. For example, suppose that family size is affected by culturally acquired beliefs about the
correct or best family size and by a genetically transmitted trait which affects the
frequency of sexual relations. It seems plausible that such a genetic character might
not have any effect on the cultural transmission of beliefs about family size. When
this situation exists, it is possible for the coevolution of genes and culture to become
a sort of arms race in which cultural and genetic traits evolve in opposite directions,
but with behavior remaining at an intermediate value.
To make this argument more concrete we use the following simple model. As
usual we begin building the model by conceptually following a cohort of individuals through a single generation. Suppose that each individual inherits a quantitative genetic character from his genetic parents. The value of this character in a
particular individual will be denoted G; the mean value among genetic parents is
G. Further suppose that each individual inherits a quantitative cultural variant from
n teachers according to the linear rule described in Chapter 3. The value of this

character in a particular individual will be labeled X, and the mean value among
cultural parents is X. Finally, we suppose that an individual’s behavioral phenotype, Y, is a simple summing of the genetic and cultural influences:

Y=X+G

(6.24)

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias and Guided Variation

195

To fully describe this population, we need to keep track of the joint distribution of
genetic and cultural variants. We will denote this distribution among offspring as
F’(X,G). From the resultsof Chapter 3, we know that the mean values of the
cultural (X’) and genetic (G’) variants in the population are unchanged by transmission (i.e. G’ = G and X’ = X).

Next, we assume that the probability that an individual becomes a genetic
parent, W(Y), depends on its phenotype in the following way:

W(Y) = aef

(6.25)

2S,

The parameter H, is the phenotypic value that has the highest probability of
becoming a genetic parent, and the parameter 1/S, is a measure of the intensity of
selection. Similarly, the probability of becoming a teacher, Q(Y), is given by

OX Garis);
Q(Y) = al

(6.26)

The parameter H, is the phenotypic value that has the highest cultural fitness, and
1/S, is a measure of the intensity of selection on teachers. Generally we expect that
H, # H,, which means that selection on culture favors a different phenotypic value
than selection on genes. For convenience we will establish the convention that
H, > H,. This situation is shown graphically in Figure 6.4.
With these assumptions, we can calculate the mean value of G among genetic
parents and the mean value of X among cultural parents in the next generation.
These calculations are very similar to those shown in Chapters 4 and 5. They result
in the following system of recursions:
~

xX SSE

U

se veer

tes a eee
a
Bd

(6227)

oO Grerrerygh remee) ee
where V is the equilibrium variance of the genetic character and U is the equilibrium variance of the cultural character.
Genetic
Fitness

Cultural
Fitness

Phenotypic

Value

Fig. 6.4 The fitness functions for genetic and cultural selection assumed in the Freudian model.
The phenotypic value that maximizes genetic fitness is H,, and the value that OMNES eulinral
fitness is H,. The intensities of the two selection processes are measured by S,”° and S.”.

196

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

Our usual strategy at this point in the analysis is to solve the recursion and find
the equilibria. However, as is illustrated in Figure 6.5, these recursions do not have

an equilibrium; there is no combination of G and X that simultaneously satisfies
both recursions. Instead the mean values of the genetic character and the cultural
character evolve in opposite directions indefinitely. Since it has been assumed that
H, > H, , X increases and G decreases. However, by combining the two recursions
it is Poe ible to show that the mean phenotype in the population (i.e. X + G) does
reach a steady state that is intermediate between the genetic and cultural optima.
This behavior makes sense given the assumptions of the model. On average the
cultural variant X will be paired with the average genetic variant, G, and, therefore,
the average cultural fitness of individuals with cultural variant X depends on
X + G. Thus as long as G is intermediate between H, and H,, larger than average
cultural variants will always be favored by the ehete process that acts on
potential teachers. The converse is true for the genetic trait. Put metaphorically,
each inheritance system is motivated to continuously “up the ante” in an attempt to
move the resulting phenotypes nearer their respective optima.
This is not a completely reasonable result; something must intervene to prevent
infinite values of G and X. One possibility is that extreme differences between
genetic and cultural influences are maladaptive. The outcome of this model is
analogous to regulating the speed of an automobile to 30 miles per hour by
simultaneously pushing the accelerator and the brake to the floor. This seems like
an undesirable state of affairs. One would expect that individuals with strongly
conflicting genetic and cultural variants would have reduced fitness with respect to
both kinds of transmission when compared with individuals whose genetic and

Fig. 6.5 Shows that the recursions given in 6.27 do not have an equilibrium. Thee
line labeled
x’ =X gives the combinations of values of X and G which lead to no
change in x Similarly,

the line G’ = G gives the combinations that lead to no change in G. Since
these lines do not
intersect, there can be no equilibrium.

The Interaction of Selection with Direct Bias and Guided Variation

197

cultural variants combined harmoniously to achieve the same phenotypic value. It
is easy to modify the model to allow for this possibility by multiplying both the
genetic and cultural fitness of an individual by the term
=(G

K(G,X) = exp|

es x);

2Sx

(6.28)

This reduces both the cultural and the genetic fitness of an individual as the
difference between the genetic and cultural variants increases. The strength of this

effect is proportional to (1/S,)!””.

We have analyzed this model with the following simplifying assumptions: (1)
the intensities of cultural and genetic selection are equal (i.e. S, = S, = S), and
(2) selection is weak (i.e. S,S, > V,U). In this case, the mean values of the genetic

and cultural characters reach a stable equilibrium as long as S, < S—that is, if the
effect of conflicting genetic and cultural specifications on fitness is greater than the
direct effects of the characters themselves. The equilibrium value of Y is always
intermediate between the genetic and cultural optima, but the equilibrium values of
G and X can be widely disparate, especially if S is nearly equal to Sy.
A variety of other processes could be invoked to cause the cultural and genetic
means to reach a stable equilibrium. We expect that most of these mechanisms will
share the qualitative behavior of the specific model analyzed here; namely, an
intermediate equilibrium phenotype may often be achieved through a balance of
strong opposing forces—genetically inherited propensities pulling the individual in
one direction and culturally inherited beliefs pulling in the other. The model
analyzed above shows that this can be the result even if such intrapsychic conflict
is directly selected against.
This model evokes a familiar picture of the human psyche. Many authors (see
Campbell, 1975, for a review) have portrayed humans as torn between the
conflicting demands of an animal id and a socially acquired superego. One is
tempted to conclude that because so many observers have found this picture of the
human psyche plausible there must be something to it. It is intriguing that this view
of human behavior is a natural outcome of a dual inheritance model of human
evolution. However,

the fact that different thinkers within the Western tradition

have found such a model plausible may be more a testament to cultural transmission
than to empirical reality. Moreover, the dual inheritance models give us no reason
to suppose that there should only be two conflicting behavioral principles. It seems
reasonable that there are many different mutually asymmetric channels of cultural
transmission. If this is so, one of the obvious predictions is that humans should have
many conflicting goals.
Reprise

In this chapter we hope to have convinced the reader that natural selection acting
on culturally transmitted variation will tend to create evolutionary forces that
conflict with the dictates of ordinary natural selection acting on genetically transmitted variation. Indeed, we suspect that this effect will occur anytime an organism
is characterized by two or more asymmetric systems of inheritance. It will be useful
to review the key points of the argument:

198

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

1. Natural selection acting on asymmetrically transmitted variation may favor
cultural variants that are genetically maladaptive. Individuals characterized by a
particular cultural variant may be more or less likely to achieve a given social role
than individuals with other cultural variants. This means that the attainment of
many different social roles entails surviving a selection process. The variant that
maximizes the probability of attaining social roles other than that of parent may
often be different from the variant that maximizes the probability of becoming a
genetic parent. If individuals occupying social roles other than parents are involved
in cultural transmission, then many of the selection processes that act on cultural
variation may increase the frequency of genetically maladaptive cultural variants.
2. Selection on asymmetrically transmitted variation may be very strong. The
competition for many social roles, especially those with high prestige, is likely to
be much more intense than the competition to become a parent. For example, only
a single individual may be able to be mayor or headman at any given time. If these
roles are even moderately important in socialization, there will be very strong
selection on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation.
3. It is easy to imagine that asymmetric cultural life cycles may themselves be
genetically adaptive. First, the nature of the cultural life cycle has a multitude of
effects on individual genetic fitness. Virtually every aspect of behavior affects what
kinds of individuals are available as models for other individuals. Thus modifying
the cultural life cycle may have indirect costs. Second, in heterogeneous environments, asymmetric life cycles may make biased transmission more effective, and
therefore make it more likely that individuals acquire locally adaptive cultural
variants. For many of these traits the cultural and genetic optima will be similar.
Thus, it seems very plausible that asymmetric cultural life cycles may be adaptive
when averaged over all the traits that are transmitted.
4. It is plausible that direct bias and guided variation will often fail to correct for
the effects of selection acting on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation.
In Chapter 5, we argued that for directly biased transmission to be favored by
selection, the bias must increase the probability of acquiring the locally adaptive
cultural variant in a wide range of habitats. For some traits this may be readily
accomplished because either (a) the locally adaptive variant does not vary much
from habitat to habitat or (b) it is easy to evaluate the different variants that one is
exposed to and determine which is most adaptive. However, for other traits,

particularly basic beliefs and attitudes that affect many aspects of an individual’s
life, it may be very difficult for individuals to determine which is the best variant.
For these traits, we expect that direct bias and guided variation will be weak. In this
chapter, we showed that these conclusions may also hold even when natural
selection acting on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation increases the frequency of maladaptive variants.

Taken together, these points suggest that cultural transmission may often lead to the
evolution of behavior that is qualitatively different from that predicted by sociobiological theory. Cultural transmission creates persistent, heritable variation be-

The Demographic Transition

199

tween individuals. The existence of such variation allows a multitude of biological,

social, and economic selective processes to affect the frequency of different culturally transmitted variants in the population. Given the variety of roles in human
societies, it seems virtually certain that in some cases these selective processes will
favor behavioral variants that are genetically maladaptive. Nonetheless, cultural
inheritance can persist if, averaged over all traits, cultural organisms have
significant advantages over noncultural organisms.
We believe that this reasoning is sufficiently plausible to refute the argument that
human behavior must conform to the predictions of sociobiological theory. The
human capacity for culture could have evolved in the way that we have suggested;
the capacity for cultural transmission may be adaptive, and at the same time whole
suites of characters may not enhance the inclusive fitness of individuals. Moreover,

as we shall see in the next two chapters, there are processes other than natural
selection that can lead to a similar conclusion.
On the other hand, humans could inherit virtually all of their behavior culturally

and, at the same time, most important aspects of human behavior could be understood in terms of sociobiological principles. All that is required is (1) that the forces
of biased transmission and guided variation ultimately have a genetic basis, (2) that
these forces act to increase genetic fitness, and (3) that they are much stronger than
natural selection on asymmetric cultural variation. The models presented in this
chapter suggest that asymmetric cultural transmission may cause human evolution
to diverge from the predictions of sociobiological theory. Whether and to what
degree it actually does is an empirical problem.
The Demographic Transition
Earlier in this chapter we argued that the evolution of the culturally transmitted trait
of field independence and associated child-rearing styles in industrializing societies
may provide an example of the effects of selection acting on asymmetrically
transmitted cultural traits. The evolution of this complex of traits may also illustrate
how selection on asymmetrically transmitted variation can act to reduce ordinary
Darwinian fitness. From a sociobiological perspective the demographic history of
industrialization is a puzzle. One would expect that bias, guided variation, and
selection on the vertical components of cultural transmission as well as on genetic
traits should all act to increase fertility up to some optimum determined by the
availability of resources to raise the resulting offspring. The per capita resources
available in industrial and modernizing societies have expanded enormously, and
death rates have fallen substantially. But fertility and completed family size drop
in the “demographic transitions” that accompany industrialization.
A human sociobiologist might explain the demographic transition by arguing
that during modernization environments change more rapidly than do the criteria
controlling guided variation and direct bias. According to this view, fertility limitation is a by-product of outmoded vestigial tendencies to choose the wrong
number of children. This hypothesis is certainly plausible. Burley (1979) presents
a cogent argument that the cryptic estrous cycle of human females evolved as a
mechanism to prevent the spread of fertility-minimizing measures by cultural
transmission early in human evolution. She hypothesizes that the pain and discom-

200

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

fort of bearing, rearing, and raising children would act as powerful reinforcers
favoring cultural variants leading to low fertility. Evolution, by making human
females unaware of when they ovulate, combined with a powerful sex urge, made
fertility control more difficult. Modern birth control methods might cause the
demographic transition by finessing this mechanism. Other hypotheses of this
general type could undoubtedly be constructed, perhaps based on Alexander’s
(1979: 77-78) notion that culture embodies the history of past reproductive
conflicts.
It is also possible to explain the demographic transition as resulting from selection on asymmetrically transmitted variation. Recall that we argued that people like
teachers and managers are disproportionately important in horizontal and oblique
transmission in modernizing societies. In these circumstances, natural selection
should act to increase the frequency of norms and values that stress the importance
and value of these roles. Conflict with ordinary fitness will occur if one’s success
or that of one’s children in professional roles is negatively correlated with family
size. This is plausible since individuals with small families will have more time,
money, and other resources to devote to the attainment of these social roles.
This hypothesis has the weight of common experience behind it. Modern young
adults with professional aspirations delay marriage and child rearing and limit
family size in order to acquire an education and establish a career. Professional
success is viewed as a goal which conflicts with large families, partly because of
the direct effect of children on one’s own success and partly because individuals
who desire professional success are likely to want professional success for their
children. The latter implies each child must acquire a costly education; few parents
can hope to pay for a college education for all the children in a large family. People
may also feel that children conflict with the goal of maintaining an appropriate
life-style, the right kind of house, car, leisure time activities, and so forth. In the

interest of simplifying the discussion, we will ignore the effects of “conspicuous
consumption” until Chapter 8, except to say that costly displays of status could be
an important indirect bias effect favoring horizontal and oblique transmission.
We think that a good empirical case can be made that the causes of the demographic transition include natural selection operating on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation. To establish the plausibility of this hypothesis we need to
find evidence that (1) having large families inhibits upward mobility in industrial
societies and (2) those who achieve higher status in such societies spread ideas such
as norms of family size, the desirability of education and professional achievement,
and child-rearing styles via asymmetric transmission.
There is evidence that large families do impose burdens on those who desire
professional success for themselves or their children. Hill and Stafford (1974)
report that the time parents allocate to their preschool children has a positive
correlation with their education. The authoritative child-rearing patterns necessary

to develop field-independent children seem on the face of it to be more demanding
of parental time. This is certainly true for fathers, since the active participation of
fathers in child rearing appears to be necessary to develop high levels of field
independence,

especially

in sons

(Werner,

1979:

181-182).

Similar evidence

comes from the study of family size and birth order effects on IQ (Zajone and

The Demographic Transition

201

Markus, 1975; Zajonc, 1976). Large families appear to show reduced IQs among
the children, even when controlling for social class, due to a dilution of parental

attention to each child. Mason and Palan (1981) report data from Malaysia which
show that a major motivation for fertility reduction is to send children to school.
Traditionally, mothers trained older children to look after younger ones, a family
labor mobilizing device that is lost when children are sent to school. Statistical
studies support the hypothesis that large families are negatively correlated with
educational achievement, and therefore probably also with movement into occupations effective in horizontal and oblique transmission under modern or modemnizing conditions (Terhune, 1974; Watson et al., 1979). For a general review of

the effects of costly investments in children in the Third World, see Schultz (1979).
There is also evidence that asymmetrically transmitted cultural traits are involved in the demographic transition. Very likely the idea that small families are
desirable is one of the important traits transmitted by successful professionals.
Stevens (1981) analyzed the statistical effects of upward mobility on fertility. His
objective was to solve the puzzle presented by the fact that past studies had found
quite variable effects of mobility on fertility. He interpreted his findings as showing
that the extra economic resources gained by mobility had a positive effect on
fertility, but that upwardly mobile individuals also tended to adopt the attitudes and
behaviors of their newly achieved class, including lower fertility. The net effects
of mobility thus vary according to how far and into what class an individual moves.
Similarly, Jain (1981) found that the apparently complex effect of education of
women on fertility could be interpreted as women’s moving toward fertility norms
expected from a given degree of education from quite different starting points,
depending on the nation studied.
On a larger scale, Caldwell (1976) and Freedman (1979) have argued that it is
impossible to explain the timing of demographic transition either historically in the
West or in the Third World today without positing a role for the asymmetrical
transmission of values. The key fact is that, although the demographic transition is
usually associated with industrial development, different societies have begun their
transition at different points in the development process, and the transition has
proceeded at quite different rates in different societies. For example, Caldwell
gives data from the urban Yoruba of Nigeria, who have been exposed to considerable modernizing influence but who still overwhelmingly have high fertility.
Caldwell attributes the inhibited demographic transition of the Yoruba to their
success in adapting their traditional extended family system to urban life. (Recall
here LeVine,

1966, which showed an intermediate level of need for achievement

among Yoruba.)
Caldwell views the economic independence of the nuclear household as the key
variable in the demographic transition. As industrialization proceeds, asymmetric
transmission will eventually make the nuclear household the norm and lead to
decisions to reduce family size. This shift will be more or less rapid, however,

depending on the cultural inertia exerted by the preexisting family norms. In
Caldwell’s view, the overwhelming economic strength of the West has caused it to
dominate international communication to the extent that the demographic transition
is now spreading in advance of industrialization, rather than as a consequence of

202

The Natural Selection of Cultural Variations

it. In Freedman’s (1979: 9) more conservative view,
In addition to the direct effect of actual changes on life conditions, changing
perceptions of what is desirable and possible can affect motivations about
family size. This results from literacy and communication and transportation
links to the cumulating world storehouse of models, ideas and things.

Conclusion

It is possible to cite many other empirical examples which plausibly support the
notion that natural selection acting on culturally transmitted variation may act to
increase the frequency of genetically deleterious variants. For example, several
authors (Richerson and Boyd,

1978; Pulliam and Dunford,

1980; Werren

and

Pulliam, 1981; Pulliam, 1982) have independently argued that the predominance of
unilineal kinship systems among human societies is an example of the effect of
selection acting on asymmetrically transmitted cultural variation. Hamilton (1964)
showed that natural selection acting on genes could favor self-sacrificial altruistic
behavior by individuals toward their genetic relatives. It is possible to show that a
similar principle holds for cultural transmission, except now the altruism is toward
an individual’s cultural relatives. When subsistence technology favors a pattern of
unilocal postmarital residence (e.g. newlyweds always live with the bride’s parents), it is plausible that the resulting patterns of cultural kinship will favor unilineal
social organization. Another example is the existence of celibate religious orders.
It seems plausible that by avoiding the costs of bearing or supporting children,
celibates could devote more time and resources to spreading their beliefs horizontally.
The fact that these hypotheses are plausible does not mean that they are correct.
In virtually every case it is possible to construct a hypothesis that indicates that the
seemingly maladaptive behaviors in question are, in fact, genetically adaptive.
Greene (1978), Alexander (1979a), and Kurland (1979) have independently pro-

posed ways in which matrilineality can be genetically adaptive, and Hartung (1976)
has suggested an adaptive rationale for patrilineal social organization. Alexander
(1979a: 80) has suggested that celibate priests may increase their inclusive fitness
by helping their relatives to reproduce. He has also suggested that the parishioners
may coerce priests into being celibate so that they cannot use their influential
position to increase their own reproductive success.
Determining which of these two classes of hypotheses is correct in any particular
circumstance requires much more information than is typically available. It is
important to note, however, that this argument cuts both ways. There is no a priori
reason to accept either kind of hypothesis: Dual inheritance models and conventional sociobiological models are both consistent with the origin of the human
species through the processes of ordinary organic evolution. Which hypothesis is
correct in any given situation is an empirical question. For some behaviors, for
example those involving sexual jealousy, we think that it is very plausible that the
sociobiological hypothesis is correct. For others, like celibate religious orders and

Conclusion

203

the limitation of family size among the modern middle classes, it seems more
plausible to us that other mechanisms are at work.
We think that the results of this chapter are very important because they mean
that, under the circumstances outlined earlier in this chapter, the natural selection

of culturally transmitted variations can cause human behavior to diverge systematically from the predictions of conventional sociobiological theory. In the next two
chapters we will investigate two other processes which have the same effect.

7
Frequency-dependent
Bias and the Evolution
of Cooperation
To us at the time, a suicide air force was a very natural thing, nothing more than
a means of self-defense toward the end of the war. True, the war ended and

saved me 28 years ago, but if I had to be a Kamikaze pilot again, I would.
Sei Watanabe, Lt. Gen., Japan Defense Force, Ret., quoted in

The Cherry Blossom Squadrons, Hagomoro Society (1973: 52)

Why did men like Sei Watanabe choose to become Kamikazes when death was the
nearly certain result? Coercion does not seem to have been an important factor.
Like most of the thousands of Kamikaze pilots, Watanabe was a volunteer. A
shortage of suitable airplanes forced the Japanese navy to turn down volunteers
until the very last days of the war. Indeed, according to Millot’s (1970) history of
the Kamikazes, the idea of suicide attacks originated among ordinary pilots who
were frustrated by their inability to damage American ships in the face of faster and
better armored American fighter planes. Only later was it adopted as a legitimate
tactic by the Japanese navy. Nor can we attribute all the willingness to volunteer
to a combination of youthful patriotism and ignorance about the realities of war,
although these factors were undoubtedly important. Many of the volunteers were
experienced combat pilots. One of the difficulties that faced the commanders of
Kamikaze squadrons was that experienced pilots were required to escort the Kamikazes to their targets, and these pilots wanted to be Kamikazes (Millot, 1970). For

many volunteers, the answer seems to be that they believed such extraordinary
measures were necessary for Japan to escape defeat. Given that suicide tactics were
much more effective than conventional attacks, these men felt obligated to implement them, even if it meant their own deaths.
And how did men come to have such self-destructive beliefs? Millot argues that
the complex of beliefs that gave rise to the Kamikaze tactic can be traced back to
the Samurai military code of feudal Japan which called for heroic self-sacrifice and
put death before dishonor. When the Japanese military modernized in the nineteenth century, the officer corps was drawn from the Samurai class. These men
brought their values and transmitted them to subsequent generations of officers who
in turn inculcated these values in their men.
We find this kind of historical explanation unsatisfying for two reasons. First,
it is incomplete. It tells us why a particular generation of Japanese came to believe
204

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of

in heroic self-sacrifice for the common

Cooperation

205

good; it does not tell us how these beliefs

came to predominate in the warrior class of feudal Japan. Second, it is not general
enough. The beliefs that led the Kamikazes to die for their country are just an
especially stark example of a much more general tendency of humans to behave
altruistically toward members of various groups of which they are members.
We would like an explanation which tells us how the mechanisms of cultural
transmission can cause altruistic beliefs to increase in frequency and eventually to
predominate in a society. Such an explanation must overcome two difficulties.
1. It must tell us how the tendency to acquire self-sacrificial beliefs and values
could have evolved. The central tenet of sociobiological theory is that behavior of
humans (and all other organisms) should maximize genetic fitness. A corollary of
this principle is that natural selection can lead to cooperation among large numbers
of individuals only if they are genetically closely related, as for example in the
social insects. For the ecological and demographic parameters that characterize
most mammals, cooperation will be limited to relatively small groups of related
individuals. With the exception of humans, this result seems consistent with the
available data (Wilson, 1975). Thus we should expect that biased transmission and

guided variation should act to reduce the frequency of self-sacrificial beliefs and
values.
2. It must tell us why altruisic cooperation is directed toward some individuals
and not others.

In most

societies,

individuals

belong to more

than one

social

grouping, for example, a clan, an ethnic group, a social class, or a state. The
interests of these groups often conflict with each other and with the individual’s
own interests. In making choices, how much weight should the individual give to
his own interests and the interests of each of the groups to which he belongs? For
sociobiologists, the theory of kin selection gives relatively clear answers to these
questions. Alternative theories explaining the extensive non-kin cooperation in the
human species need to be similarly specific.

Donald Campbell (1975) has argued that the altruistic nature of most systems of
moral teaching suggests that these cultural traits have been shaped by some kind of
group selection process; according to Campbell’s argument, groups with belief
systems that cause individuals within the group to cooperate effectively survive
longer and produce more cultural propagules. Eventually this process would cause
self-sacrificial belief systems to predominate. There are two difficulties with this
explanation. First, it seems likely that directly biased transmission, guided variation, and natural selection should act within groups to decrease the frequency of
self-sacrificial cultural variants. Experience with genetic models suggests that such
within-population forces will tend to be stronger than selection among groups.
Second, any mode of cultural transmission which allowed group selection to predominate would itself be selected against.
In this chapter we show that the kind of cultural group selection envisioned by
Campbell can be the by-product of an otherwise adaptive mode of biased cultural
transmission. We begin by analyzing a model of cultural transmission in which
naive individuals have a tendency to acquire the variant that is more common
among the individuals available to them as models. This “conformist” transmission
tule is one example of a more general class of rules we label ““frequency-dependent

206

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

bias.” Conformist frequency-dependent bias has two interesting effects: first, in a
spatially varying environment, it can provide a simple general rule that improves
the chance of acquiring the locally favored cultural variant, and second, it increases
the amount of cultural variation among groups relative to the amount of cultural
variation within groups. This in turn can cause selection between groups to favor
cultural variants which enhance the success of the group at the expense of the
individual. We will conclude by considering evidence on ethnocentrism in the
context of these models.
Models of Frequency-dependent Bias

According to our definition, frequency-dependent bias occurs whenever a naive
individual uses the frequency of a variant among his models to evaluate the merit
of the variant. It is important to understand this does not mean that frequencydependent transmission occurs whenever the probability that an individual acquires
a particular variant depends on the frequency of the variant among its models.
Indeed, the latter will be true almost any time there is cultural transmission. Our
definition of frequency-dependent bias requires that naive individuals be disproportionately likely to acquire the more (or less) common variant.
To understand this distinction better, consider the following simple example:
suppose a cultural trait with two variants, c and d, is transmitted vertically by n
models with equal intrinsic weights. Even if transmission is completely unbiased,
the probability that a naive individual acquires trait c still depends on the frequency
of c among his models in the way shown in Figure 7.1a. When transmission is
unbiased, this relationship is a straight line because unbiased transmission is analogous to naive individuals’ randomly choosing a model. The probability of getting
a particular variant is just the frequency of the variant among the set of models.
Figure 7.1b graphs the relationship between the frequency of c and the probability
that a naive individual acquires c assuming that transmission is directly biased in
favor of c. The probability that a naive individual acquires c is always greater than
if he had selected a model at random. We presume that this results from the fact
that naive individuals evaluate alternative variants and tend to choose variant c over
variant d.
Suppose that naive individuals use the commonness of a variant among their
models as an indirect measure of its merit. This will result in an increase in the
probability of acquiring the more common variant relative to unbiased transmission
as is shown in Figure 7.1c. When the frequency of c in the set of models is greater
than one-half, the probability that a naive individual acquires c with frequencydependent transmission is greater than at the same frequency with unbiased transmission. When the frequency of c among models is less than one-half, the probability of acquiring c is reduced relative to unbiased transmission. Obviously,
frequency-dependent bias could also favor the rarer variant. More complex kinds
of frequency dependence are also possible (Lumsden and Wilson, 1980).
Frequency-dependent bias should also be distinguished from direct bias in which
the strength and direction of bias depend on the frequency of the variant in the
population. It may often be that the merit of a variant depends on the frequency of
the variant in the population. For example, the attractiveness of an occupation may

Models of Frequency-dependent Bias

1

207

(a)

\

ro)= Ee =)

PROBABILITY
ACQUIRING
OF
C
VARIANT
O
O

n

NUMBER OF MODELS
CHARACTERIZED BY
VARIANT C
Fig. 7.1 The probability that a naive individual acquires a cultural variant depends on the
frequency of that variant among that individual’s models assuming (a) unbiased transmission,
(b) directly biased transmission, and (c) frequency-dependent biased transmission.

depend on how many individuals in the population pursue it. If the number of
university professors is large relative to the demand, becoming a university professor may be unattractive; if there is a shortage of engineers, becoming an engineer
may be quite appealing. In these cases the magnitude and direction of direct bias
acting on the transmission of cultural variants that affect occupational choice
depend on the frequency of these variants in the population. We want to distinguish
this “frequency-dependent direct bias” from frequency-dependent bias because the
former requires the naive individual to evaluate the merit of different variants.
Effective evaluation of the alternatives may be costly in the same way as ordinary
direct bias. In contrast, in frequency-dependent bias the naive individual does not
directly evaluate the merit of the variants to which he is exposed; rather, he simply
uses the frequency of a variant among his models (not the population) as an indirect
measure of its merit.

A simple model of frequency-dependent bias
To see how frequency-dependent bias affects the frequency of alternative cultural
variants in a population, consider the very simple case of vertical transmission of
a dichotomous trait by sets of three models. We begin with three models because
this is the smallest set of models in which frequency-dependent bias is possible. As
before, assume that each individual can be characterized by one of two culturally

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

208

Table 7.1 The
transmission

effect of a simple example

of frequency-dependent

cultural

Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant

Cultural Variant of
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

c

d

c

Cc

@

1

0

c
Cc
d

c
d
Cc

d
Cc
Cc

2/3 + .D/3

1/3 — D/3

d
d
c

d
c
d

c
d
d

1/3 — D/3

2/3 + D/3

d

d

d

0

1

transmitted variants, c and d. The probability that an individual acquires variant c,
given that he is exposed to a particular set of models, is shown in Table 7.1. This
cultural transmission rule is particularly simple because each of the models is
assumed to have the same role. It does not matter which models are characterized
by variant c, only how many are so characterized. Let p be the frequency of c in
the population of models.
If one assumes that each set of models is a random sample of the population, then
it is shown in Box 7.1 that the frequency of c among naive individuals after
transmission, p’, is given by

Doe Dep

le Depa)

(7.1)

There are several things to note about Equation 7.1. First, if the frequencydependent bias parameter, D, equals zero, cultural transmission is unbiased and, as

one would expect, transmission leaves the frequency of traits unchanged. Second,
the direction of force depends on both the sign of D and the frequency of c: if

Box 7.1 With random mating the probability of forming a set of parents with ic
individuals given that the frequency of c is p, M(i|p), is

M(i|p) = (7) =p

a

The frequency of c after transmission, p’, is

p’ = (1)M(G3|p) + (2/3 + D/3)M(2|p) + (1/3 — D/3)M(1|p)

=p’ + (2/3 + D/3){3p°(1 — p)} + (1/3 — D/3)3p(1 — p)?}
= p{p* + 2p(1 — p) + (1 — p)*} + D{p°(1 — p) — p( — p)}
= pr Dp = p)Qpe

1)

Models of Frequency-dependent Bias

209

D > 0, cultural transmission creates a force increasing the frequency of the more
common variant in the population. That is, if p > 0.5, then p’ > p, and if
p < 0.5, then p’ < p. If D < 0, transmission increases the frequency of the rarer
variant in the population.
The relationship between direct and frequency-dependent bias will be clearer if
Equation 7.1 is rewritten as follows:

De Dae 2p

1 )Nar(p)

(7:2)

Thus the magnitude of the force depends on two factors: the variance of the trait
in the population just as in the case of direct bias, and the term D(2p — 1) which
is like a bias SUIS Ss that depends on the frequency of the variant in the population. When p = 3, the frequency-dependent bias parameter is zero; as DieeaU 08
1 the absolute magnitude of the parameter increases; its sign depends on the sign
of D.
Making the model more complicated
Clearly this is a very simple model. One would like to know if making the model
more realistic leads to any qualitative changes in the results. In this section we add
several complications to the model, one at a time. First, suppose that models in
different social roles have different linear weights. To allow for unequal weights
suppose that the ith model has a basic weight a; (2a; = 1). Then, as is shown in
Table 7.2, we suppose that the actual weight of the ith model, A;, depends on (1)

Table 7.2 The probability of offspring acquiring trait c or d given a particular set
of models when the parents have different intrinsic weights, a;, a2, and a3
Probability That Offspring
Acquires Cultural Variant

Cultural Variant of
Model

1

Model 2

Model 3

c

c

c

c

1

Cc

Cc

d

(a; + a2) (1 + D/2)
oo

:

:

:

(=D) (eos) a

1 + (D/2) (1 — 2a3)
(oq
o3) (1
D2)
(a3 “Ur Q2) (1 “Ue D/2)

ai(1

y

2

(ep

s

d

.

[AD

:

2

¢

MenyOnt 22a) 6 ey

«

4

d

d

d

ne

a2(1 ou D/2)

D2)

&

°

/ 2)

a3(1 — D/2)

14
(0/2)
(= 223)
a)

7

D/2)

Wen /2)

een)

ax(1—D/2)= 2a) (au
+a)(1+D/2)
1H (D/2) (era)

a(

1s D/2)

(a, + a3) (1 + D/2)

ai(1 — D/2)

(a3 + a2) (1 + D/2)

0

1

Tiel

Daan

AiR or)

wales) 2)dn=a2a)

210

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

his basic weight and (2) the commonness of his cultural variant in the set of models
to which he belongs. It is shown in Box 7.2 that this transmission rule results in
the following change in the frequency of c:

p’ =p + D.,p(l — p)(2p — 1)

(7.3)

where

where n, is the effective number of models as defined in Chapter 5. Equation 7.3

says that increasing the effective number of models (while holding the actual
number constant) increases the strength of the frequency-dependent bias. We derived a similar result in the case of direct bias.
This result is interesting in the context of horizontal transmission. Suppose that
a particular individual encounters two other individuals, and then, given his own
behavior and that of the others, acquires (or remains) type c with a given probaBox 7.2 Let P(c|ccd) denote the conditional probability that an offspring acquires
variant c given that it is exposed to models with variants c, c, and d. Then from the
table

P(c| ced) =

(1 — as)(1 + D/2)
1 + (D/2)(1 — 2a)

If D is small enough to ignore terms of order D*, then
P(c|ccd) = (1 — as)[1 + (D/2) — (D/2)(1 — 2a;)]
which can be simplified to become
P(c ccd) =

1 — as + Das — Da;”

Analogous derivations yield expressions for P(c ede) and P(c |dec). The sum of these
three terms is
3

P(c| ced) + P(c|ede) + P(c|dec) = 2 + D(1 eS

a?)

i=1

Due to the symmetry of the model, P(c|dde) = 1 — P(c| ced). Thus
3

P(c|dde) + P(c|ded) + P(c}edd) = 1 — D{1 - 5 ai}
—
i=]

The frequency of c after transmission, p’, given that it was p before transmission, is

p’ = p’ + p°(l — pX{P(c| ced) + P(e{ede) + P(c|dee)}
+ p(l — p)*{P(c|ddc) + P(c|ded) + P(c|cdd)}
Combining these expressions yields Equation 7.3 in the text.

Models of Frequency-dependent Bias

211

bility. As we showed in Chapter 3, this model is identical to a vertical model in
which different social roles have different weightings except that the generation
time is now the time it takes to encounter two other individuals. The result just
derived suggests that if individuals give great weight to their own behavior or to that
of individuals occupying one social role, the effect of frequency-dependent bias
will be weakened.
These results can also be extended to include nonrandom formation of sets of
models. It seems likely that in many cases sets of models will not be formed at
random; rather, similar individuals will tend to aggregate. For example, among
husbands and wives in the United States, many characters such as political party
and religious affiliation are highly correlated. In population genetics, the analogous
phenomenon is called “assortative mating.” To model assortative formation of sets
of three models,

we assume

that there is a constant correlation, r, between the

cultural variants of two of the models and that the third model is chosen at random.
For example, the political beliefs of a child’s mother and father might be highly
correlated with each other but uncorrelated with beliefs of the child’s teachers. With
this assumption the probability that each set is formed is as given in Table 7.3. It
is shown in Box 7.3 that the frequency of variant c after frequency-dependent
transmission is given by

Fe

i

Le pyp: 21)

(7.4)

Table 7.3 The probability that each of the possible sets of models form when the
sets may form nonrandomly
Set of Models
Correlated Models
Model |
Model 2

Uncorrelated
Model

oc)
=hgi
clei
ots
(et
0
aA
4&0
aon0 ehey
eaaanaaoaaaana

Probability of Formation
of Set of Models

{q’(1 — r) + qr}q
fe eee ty ears
lise q)
g( leq), Cleetr) yg
tq lier) (leer) }ig
tq sq) Clr) eg)
1a( tae) (leer) (hq)
Hee
ane maak) ata Lmeanc Cla
tleesec)
Wdeeset) tr (lo q)rh( tea)

Box 7.3 According to our assumptions, a fraction | — r of the sets of models are
formed at random. Thus

p’ = (1 — np + Dp(1 — p)(2p — 1)]

+ r{p? + p(1 — p)[(2/3 + D/3) + (1/3 — D/3)]}
= (1 —1)[p + Dp(1 — p)(2p — 1)] + rplp + (1 — p)]
= p + (1 — r)Dp(1 — p)(2p — 1)

212

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

Equation 7.4 says that positive assortative formation of sets of models weakens
the force due to frequency-dependent bias. This makes sense since assortative
mating decreases the probability that the correlated models will be characterized by
different cultural variants. In the extreme case when r = 1, the correlated models
are exactly the same. This means that sets of models can have at most two different
models, and frequency-dependent transmission can have no effect. In general the
more variability that exists in sets of models the stronger the force of frequencydependent bias. Positive assortment weakens frequency-dependent bias, and negative assortment strengthens it.
Finally, these results can be generalized to allow more than three models.
Assume that there are n models and that each model has an equal weight, 1/n. As
usual, we assign the ith model a numerical value, X;, which is equal to one if he
is characterized by cultural variant c and is equal to zero if he is characterized by
d. Finally, we assume that the frequency-dependent bias depends only on the
number of models that are characterized by a particular cultural variant. With these
assumptions we can write the transmission rule algebraically as follows:

Prob(naive individual = c |j) = j/n + D(j)

(7.5)

where

The function D(j) gives the effect of frequency-dependent bias in a set of cultural

parents with j c individuals. ©

It is easy to conceive of a wide variety of different kinds of frequency-dependent
bias when there are more than three models. For example, naive individuals might
be predisposed to imitate traits which characterize an odd number of their models.
More plausibly, naive individuals might be predisposed to imitate the most common type as long as it is not too common, but beyond a certain frequency, they
imitate the rare type. Here we want to restrict attention to the two simplest cases,

common type favored, or “conformist transmission,” and rare type favored, or
“nonconformist transmission.” Lumsden and Wilson (198 1) consider models which

include more complex frequency-dependent effects. Conformist transmission requires that D(j) = 0 for j = n/2 and D(j) < 0 for j <n/2, and nonconformist
transmission requires the reverse. To focus on the effects of frequency-dependent

bias

we

also

assume

(1)

that

there

is

no

random

variation,

so

that

D(n) = D(O) = 0, and (2) that there is no direct bias, so that D(j) = Dd —
j).
With these assumptions it is shown in Box 7.4 that n-model frequencydependent bias has properties that are very similar to the three-model case.
Conformist transmission increases the frequency of the variant with the higher
frequency, and nonconformist transmission increases the frequency of the variant
that
is in lower frequency. In both cases the magnitude of the force approache
s zero as

Pp approaches 1, 3, or 0.

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

213

Box 7.4 With random mating the probability of forming a set of parents with ile
individuals, given that the frequency of c is p, M(j|p), is

M(j|P) = (*\pc — p)
Thus the frequency of c after transmission, p’, is

p= > {j/n + Dii(")pra Spin
Because M(j|p) is the binomial distribution

veri

Pas 5 D((")p =p)
Cie

Let k = n/2 + 1 if nis even and k = (n + 1)/2 if n is odd. Then we can rewrite
this equation as follows:
n

aes

Dun(*)pia =D)

eit Laie a ‘ Jerod =a
nd

j=

And since D(j)
Il
he)on,

= —D(n — j) < 0, it follows that

S ("irra PP)

ee Ps

ep)?

j=k

First consider conformist transmission. Then D(j) > 0 for j > k. Thus the frequency

of c will increase whenever 1 > p > 1/2 and will decrease whenever 1/2 > p > 0.
If transmission is nonconformist, the reverse will occur.

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

It would be interesting to know if there are any circumstances in which individuals
who acquire their behavior via frequency-dependent bias will have higher fitness on
the average than individuals who utilize a cultural transmission rule without the
conformist effect. One such situation may exist when a population is subdivided
into a number of subpopulations in which different behaviors are favored by
selection. In such subdivided populations, migration between subpopulations will
often maintain cultural variation in each subpopulation. In many cases, however,
the variant favored by selection, guided variation, or direct bias in a particular

subpopulation will also be the most common variant. Under these conditions,
conformist transmission is a simple general rule that increases the probability that
an individual will acquire the locally favored variant.
In this section we analyze the evolution of frequency-dependent bias in a spatially varying habitat, proceeding much as in earlier chapters. First, we describe and
analyze a simple model in which alleles at a genetic locus influence the extent to
which cultural transmission is characterized by frequency-dependent bias. Then
this model is embedded in a spatially varying environment. We will see that there

214

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

are a range of plausible environments in which alleles causing cultural transmission
to be subject to frequency-dependent bias will replace alleles leading to unbiased
transmission.
A model of the genetic modification of frequency-dependent bias

Consider a large population of individuals, each of whom is characterized by one
of two cultural variants, c and d. We assume that this trait is acquired via oblique
cultural transmission from three models and that the members of the set of models
for each naive offspring are drawn randomly from the individuals present in each
subpopulation. As indicated earlier in this chapter, we believe that much more
general models will have the same qualitative properties. Also, suppose that each
individual is characterized by one of two genotypes, e and f. Individuals with
genotype e are characterized by an unbiased transmission rule. Individuals with
genotype f are characterized by a rule with frequency-dependent bias as shown in
Table 7.1. Genetic parents are also drawn at random from the population as a
whole.
With these assumptions there are four kinds of individuals, ec, fc, ed, and fd.

The frequencies of each of these kinds of individuals in the pool of cultural parents
are R., Fe, Ra, and Fy. The frequency of the cultural variant c among models
(KR, + Fy) is p, and the frequency of the genotype e among parents (EK, + Ky) is q.

The frequency of each of these kinds of individuals after transmission is

F.. = qip + Dp(1 — p)(2p — 1)]
F, =

(1 —-

Fea = qll — p — Dp(l — p)@p — 1))
Pras

Peeag)( ice D)

Next, suppose that the probability that c individuals become parents (either genetic
or cultural) is W., and the probability that d individuals become parents is W,. It will

be useful to let the ratio W./W; = 1 + s. Then, the frequency of c among cultural
parents, p”, is

p" = (1 + s)[p + qDp(1 — p)@p — 1)]/W

(7.7)

where

W = 1 + s{p + qDp(l — p)(2p — 1]
The properties of this recursion will be clearer if we assume that selection and
biased transmission are so weak that terms of order s?, sD, and D? can be ignored.
Under this assumption

= Dep

pls

ODD)

(7.8)

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

215

The net effect of frequency-dependent transmission and selection depends on the
sign of the term, s + qD(2p — 1). By hypothesis, selection favors variant c, which
means that s > 0. The effect of frequency-dependent bias depends on the signs of
D and (2p —

1). If transmission is conformist (D > 0), then transmission tends to

increase p if p > 3 and decrease it if p < 5. This means that if p > }, the net effect
of selection and conformist transmission always is to increase p. On the other hand,
if p < }, the net effect of the two forces depends on the relative magnitudes of qD
and s. If transmission is nonconformist (D < 0), then the net effect of the two

forces always increases p if p < 3. When p > }, the direction of the force again
depends on the relative magnitudes of qD and s. For a given nonzero value of q,
this recursion has three equilibria, p = 0, p = 1, and p = 3(1 — s/qD). The
internal equilibrium can be stable only if D < 0.
The frequency of the bias genotype e among genetic parents is

q” = q[1 + sp + sDp(1 — p)(2p — 1)]/W
To better interpret Equation
simplifies to

7.9, assume

that selection

q’ =q + q(1 — q)s-(p)

is weak.

(7.9)
Then

7.9

(7.10)

where

se = sDp(1 — p)(2p — 1)
The term s, is the effective selective advantage of the bias genotype as a function
of the frequency of the cultural variants. The form of s, is shown graphically in
Figure 7.2. The bias genotype will increase if (a) D > 0 and $<p<1lor(b)
D < Oand 0 < p <3. In other words, conformist transmission is always favored
by selection if the favored cultural variant is more common than the alternative
variant; nonconformist transmission is favored if the favored cultural variant is rarer

than the alternative variant.

Fig. 7.2 The effective selective advantage (s.) of a genotype exercising frequency-dependent
cultural
bias relative to an unbiased genotype as a function of the frequency of the favored
variant in the population (p).

DE

Pena

vepeneicie Ras ane ote Detain gyCQeperaion

We a wengueald an avails uniter emareament, Hequeacy-dependent bias
equiltbrium
stable ble
ate
leug eam. ED > O, the only possi
a Me
SaRR DOiners
cam have
bias
dent
equeney-epen
wallies
Mee
af
gin)
AND Que,
MAREN DEAE
equilibrium
intemal
Sadie
a
thee
0,
<
ID
al
Gaeeeus
oe
aS BARRE Neio
wae Re PR NAE HOwevee eendemven ef he complete set of two recur
SaaS SWS Mae AY NAS GENE well Geeeease urRequeacy, These facts suggest
DA WS QNUEY 2 Seda \ sareng emareament.
Deagacem demain
Nas 284 ynatual) vearweiig enverunmens
RMR

Mee | Yas lege geuladee of individuals is subdivided inte alarge

SAAREERER AA uP He BSUS Vewen, eect indnadual is charactenzed by one
dreere elnennlly tennemninned Rehereters, ¢ and @,andcan oftere geaniyges, & and
Y Me ReesQf > PedtalS gineeg medeis just Defre cultural transmission
edhe AD Sadguguiaiiaer iAINdeRE B, and the Sequency ofthebias genotype, e,
SAN

BAOKN GP He ad Gdepepuisaee is g. peraicy sattteeendineetins Si

maaan
HH = Lf > S where 5 cam De either negaitve or positive. This
RAIN Dat De Quits Saran COS Baered ur some Naditaes but net in others. We
eS

VE B HE Fouhe ef UNig 2 ede! with mere than twe subpopulations

PL
weil W owt eho WE Cutie | umresogaie the effect of selection among
Sates
See dt FHS Sapien.

Lae d W Me Fwy

BO Bad

AH

ef He cuiltiral Vartan’ ¢ i the ithhabitat. Then, using

SL Veto, He Fequewey of ¢ after Tansmission and selection in

Be Ut Seonuseer|S

a =

+ Vim + ePatt — Wer — DI/W

(AD

K= 0+ cm + adett — Waa — DI
De Fees afgeeene saat ¢ urthe dtGdpepuladen is
ao = alt + sa + batt ~ Wer — DI/K

(7.12)

_ SARE Roa uve aintowtials cangeaie. Bact undividual has a probability
a~- fe A HAMA Gt WS gas GOdpepuiadee te reproduce and a prodability m
atemagnaing: We tuPoutalS wade gengesie Rave am equal prodadility of settling
} VO} A HE ] Udeeruianees, mciding the ene they just left. Some density-

SRO

FNRES RQUES De Sze af cack sudpepulatiom so that each sub-

SANTAIES ar Qual tue ef LtUDaduals tethe pool of migrants each
NUN
gerennn, Sham GS NcunpTeNs, the Fequency ef ¢ individuals im the ith

San
slikeu
mmgmmen, Que Qefre Tansmissionpi",
, is

a” =~ met + caySer
ba

(7.13)

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

217

In Box 7.5, we show that the equilibrium frequency of c individuals in the ith
subpopulation, p;, must satisfy the following conditions:

(a

Sirs

Wa)
ee
Avie.
AT
nee
(1
— fp,
(=i m) (PC
fs
=4P
Cp
—DU +s
—pil)

m

W.

(7.14)

where p is defined as the average frequency of c individuals in the whole population
at equilibrium, that is,

Di (/nyS 6,

(7.15)

i=1

Similarly, the frequency of the conformist genotype in the ith subpopulation after
migration is

qi” = (1 — mq! + (m/n) Yq!

j=1
and the equilibrium frequencies of the genotype e, q;, must satisfy

G5 Oi

d — m)

/4( — q)s([DBiC

m

— 6)2pi —

1]

W,

(7.16)
(7.17)

Now, suppose that the population is fixed for the unbiased genotype. (This is an
equilibrium since the second term on the right-hand side of 7.17 is zero in every
Box 7.5 For convenience let

Pi = pi + F(pi)
where the function F(p;) is defined implicitly by Equation 7.11. Then from Equation 7.13

pi” = {pi + F(p)}(1 — m) + m/n > {pi + F(p;)}
fori =1,...,n.

Thus at equilibrium

—mp; + F(p)(1 — m) + m/n 3: {, + F(G)}
j=l

again fori = 1, . . . , n. Now we sum both sides over i, which yields

0=-mS p+ (1-m SFG) + m/nd > {6 + FG}
i=1

i=1

j=1

—m 3 p+ (I~ m) > Fh) +m > f+ mY FO)
i=1

3 F(fi)

Thus at equilibrium the changes in the frequency of c before dispersal must sum to
zero. With this result Equation 1 above becomes Equation 7.14 in the text.

218

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

subpopulation.) To determine whether the conformist genotype can increase, we
need to calculate the equilibrium frequency of c in the various subpopulations,
pi,. . -,Pa- The right-hand side of 7.14 defines a function of fj, f(p;) which is plotted
in Figure 7.3. Equation 7.14 says that the ith subpopulation will be in equilibrium
if p = f(p;). In general, p will also be a function of ;. If, however, we assume that
there are a large number of subpopulations, then the average frequency of c
individuals in the whole population, p, will be approximately independent of the
changes in the frequency in any subpopulation. Thus, for any given value of p, say
Ri, the equilibrium frequency of c in the ith subpopulation, p;, can be determined
graphically by finding the intersection of f(p;) and the line p = B.
So far the presentation has been fairly general. Now we make the special
assumption that p = 0.5. (This would occur if on average c and d are equally likely
to be favored by selection and if the distribution of initial frequencies of c in the
subpopulations satisfies certain conditions.) With this special assumption, it is easy
to show that conformist transmission is adaptive. In Figure 7.3a the form of f(p;)
is plotted assuming that D = 0 and that s; < 0. The latter assumption means that
d individuals are favored by selection in subpopulation i. Notice that p; < 0.5, that
is, at equilibrium the favored trait is more frequent. Moreover, this must be true in
every subpopulation. Thus, according to Equation 7.11, the conformist genotype
will increase in every subpopulation. This makes sense since offspring who acquire
their behavior via a conformist cultural inheritance rule have a higher probability
of acquiring the trait favored by selection than offspring who utilize a linear rule.
Thus selection should act to increase D.

(a)

1.0

0.0

Dp

0.5

1.0

Fig. 7.3 Graphs of the function f(f;) for three values of D, assuming
that the frequency of
variant c in the metapopulation, p, is 0.5. Equilibria occur whenever f(p;)
= 0.5. Thus, when
D=0 (a), or when D is small (b), there is only one possible equilibrium
in each subpopulation
When D is large enough (c), there are three equilibria, p., p,, and pa.
.

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

219

(b)

(c)

In Figure 7.3b, f(p;) is also plotted assuming that the conformist genotype is
fixed in each subpopulation (i.e. p; = 1 fori = 1,. . .,n). Once again the equilibrium frequency of the favored cultural variant is greater than one-half and
therefore the conformist genotype can resist invasion by the unbiased genotype. It
will also favor invasion by a genotype with an even stronger conformist effect. This
suggests that selection will continue to increase D until D = 1 or a situation like
that pictured in Figure 7.3c is reached. Now there are three equilibrium values of

220

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

pi, which we will label p,, pa, and p,. The central equilibrium, p,, is unstable, and

the other two equilibria are stable. In subpopulations at equilibrium, at p, selection
will continue to favor increased values of D; however, in subpopulations at equilibrium at pg, selection will favor decreased values of D. It is unclear under what
conditions selection will continue to increase D.
It would be of interest to see if selection would continue to favor frequencydependent bias when p # 3and when there are three equilibria. To investigate these
questions we have performed a number of computer simulations of the recursions
defined by 7.11 and 7.12. These simulations suggest that the results derived above
generalize to these more general cases (see Fig. 7.4). Selection continues to in-

crease D when p # § and when D is large.
This model illustrates what we believe is an important general property of
conformist transmission. In spatially varying environments, it can serve as a simple, generally applicable rule that increases the probability that individuals acquire
traits that are favored in the local habitat. The forces of guided variation, directly
biased transmission, and natural selection will act to increase the frequency of the
favored cultural variant. However, migration from habitats in which other variants
are favored will tend to reduce the frequency of the locally favored variant. These
forces may often result in an equilibrium in which the locally favored variant is the
most common variant. When this is true, individuals who have a tendency to

1.0
WwW)

rr

(a)

~

(b)

(Ta)

<

faa)
uJ

=

(c)

O
>
U

=)

G
uJ

es
5

0

1000

2000

GENERATIONS
Fig. 7.4 The frequency of the frequency-dependent bias allele is plotted against time for three
sets of parameter values.

In each case m = 0.05, s = 0.1, and D = 0.25. In (a), cultural

variant c was favored in half of the subpopulations and d in the other half. In (b), cultural
variant
c was favored in one-fourth of the subpopulations and d in the other three-fourths. In (c),
¢ was
favored in one-eighth of the subpopulations. In each case the frequency of the
bias allele
eventually converged to one.

The Adaptive Advantages of Conformist Transmission

221

acquire the most common variant would also have an improved chance of acquiring
the locally favored variant.
Frequency-dependent bias and quantitative characters: An analogy with
robust estimators

We believe that this advantage of conformist transmission is likely to generalize to
a wide variety of other models. A consideration of a quantitative model of conformist cultural transmission provides two different kinds of evidence supporting
this claim. First, we show that conformist transmission of a quantitative character
is also adaptive in a spatially varying environment. Second, the quantitative model
demonstrates that conformist transmission is analogous to the use of what statisticians call “robust estimators.” Robust estimators are widely useful in statistics
when data are “contaminated,” that is, when some of the observations have been

generated by processes other than the one of interest. We think it plausible that
conformist transmission is useful in a wide range of variable environments for
similar reasons.
Two models are very unlikely to be characterized by exactly the same cultural
variant of a quantitative character, and therefore naive individuals cannot literally
adopt the more common variant. This means that we must generalize our notion of
conformist transmission. Suppose that the distribution of the cultural variant in the
population is unimodal as is shown in Figure 7.5a. Then, as is shown in 7.5b, in
a typical set of models, those models with the biggest and smallest cultural variants
will tend to be drawn from the tails of the distribution, while those with inter-

mediate variants will tend to be drawn from its center. This suggests that in the case
of quantitative characters, a conformist transmission rule should be biased against
those models whose trait values are the most extreme and in favor of models whose
trait values are intermediate.
A wide variety of such transmission rules are conceivable. Here we will consider
one very simple example, a “trimmed mean” rule. Suppose each naive offspring is
DISTRIBUTION OF
VARIANTS IN
THE POPULATION

(a)

DISTRIBUTION OF
VARIANTS IN A TYPICAL
SET OF MODELS

(b}

——______@_____®__@_@__@_____®_

Fig. 7.5 (a) The distribution of individuals in a large population as a function of values of a
quantitative cultural trait. (b) A representative example of a set of six models drawn from such

a large population.

222

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

exposed to five models with equal intrinsic weights. As before, the ith model is
characterized by a cultural variant with value X;. The naive individual estimates the
cultural variant of the ith model to be Z;. With blending inheritance, we assumed

that a naive individual simply adopted the average of the Z; as his own cultural
variant. We now suppose that the naive individual ranks the models according to
their values Z;, “throws out” the models he estimates have the smallest and the

largest cultural variants, and then adopts the average of the remaining three models
as his own cultural variant. Naive individuals, in effect, adopt the 20 percent
trimmed mean of the Z; as their own cultural variant.

First, let us consider the force generated by this transmission rule, assuming that
the distribution of cultural variants in the population is normal with mean X and
variance V. Because the trimmed mean is a widely used statistical estimator, its
properties are known in this case (Tukey and Mosteller, 1977). The mean value is
not changed by transmission, and the variance after transmission is reduced by a
factor of approximately (1/n)[2/m + (1 — 2(0.2))(1 — 2/7)]. Notice that the
reduction in the variance is not quite as great as in the blending case. Finally, as
the number of parents increases, the distribution of cultural variants in the population becomes approximately normal. If we assume that (1) random variation,
measured on some scale, is approximately normally distributed, (2) there is no
migration from other habitats, and (3) there are a modest number of models, say

5-10, then it is reasonable that the culturally transmitted trait will be distributed
normally at equilibrium. Under these conditions simple blending inheritance should
be favored over the trimmed mean rule because it will have a smaller variance at
equilibrium.
Next, suppose that models are drawn from two normal distributions with the
same variance, V, but different means, X, and X,. Models are drawn with proba-

bility m from distribution 2 and probability 1 — m from distribution 1, where
m < 3. Notice that the mean of this compound distribution, X’, is simply

X’ =. X\(1. —.m) + Xsm

(7.18)

These assumptions are meant to approximate the case in which a fraction m of the
models are immigrants from another habitat. We have computed the effect of
conformist transmission using Monte Carlo methods, and the results are shown in

Figure 7.6. They indicate that (1) the mean of the population after transmission is
intermediate between X, and X’, (2) the variance is reduced, and (3) the third

moment of the distribution is quite small. These results suggest that the trimmed
mean rule should be favored relative to a blending rule in a variable environment
because naive individuals with the trimmed mean rule would on average acquire a
cultural variant closer to the local optimum than offspring who used a blending rule.
The trimmed mean is but one of many robust estimators of central tendency
(Andrews et al., 1972; Tukey and Mosteller, 1977). All of these estimators are less

sensitive to outlying observations than is the ordinary arithmetic mean. This property of robust estimators is useful when (1) data are drawn from a “thick-tailed”

distribution, such as the chi-squared distribution, or (2) data are drawn from a
normal distribution that is contaminated by data drawn from another distribution
with a different mean or a larger variance.

Empirical Research on Conformity

223

X1+Xo

2
MEAN
IN POPULATION 1
AFTER MIGRATION BUT
BEFORE
TRANSMISSION

SS

MEAN
AFTER

Xy

IN POPULATION
TRANSMISSION

0.0

1

0.5
m

Fig. 7.6 The effects of conformist transmission exercised on a quantitative trait by a 20 percent
trimmed mean rule. m is the migration rate. In the case of complete mixing (m = 0.5), the mean
after transmission moves population 1 to the mean of populations | and 2, and the conformity
tule has no effect. At intermediate migration rates, the rule tends to return population 1 back
toward its premigration value, X;.

It is reasonable to suppose that the combination of migration and a spatially
variable habitat will often cause the distribution of cultural variants in a population
to be a contaminated normal distribution. When this is true, both the theory of
robust estimators and our Monte Carlo result suggest that some kind of conformist
rule will be favored. On the other hand, it is also reasonable to suppose that the
distribution of cultural variants will often be approximately normal. In this case, a
blending rule will be favored. However, simulation studies of the properties of
various estimators (Andrews et al., 1972) have shown that robust estimators like

the trimmed mean are only slightly inferior to the arithmetic mean for normal
populations, and they are much better for contaminated or thick-tailed distributions.
This suggests that averaged over a wide variety of situations, a conformist rule like
the trimmed mean would be superior to a linear blending rule.
Empirical Research on Conformity
We have argued that conformist transmission, a form of frequency-dependent bias,
is adaptive in spatially varying habitats because it provides a simple and generally
applicable rule that increases the chance of acquiring locally adaptive behaviors. Is
there any evidence that human cultural transmission is actually characterized by a
conformist effect? Social psychologists have devoted much effort to studying the
effect of conformity on the acquisition of beliefs and attitudes. (See Keisler and
Keisler, 1969, for a review.) Unfortunately, most of this research does not clearly

distinguish between the homogenizing effects of any kind of cultural transmission
and the special effects of conformist transmission as we have defined it. Nonetheless, it will be useful to briefly review this work for several reasons. First, it is

224

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

important to understand why what psychologists have called conformity is not
identical to what we have defined as conformist transmission. Second, some of this

research suggests that conformist transmission exists. Finally, we think that these
experimental methods could easily be modified to determine whether human social
learning is regularly characterized by a conformist effect.
The seminal experiments of Sherif (1935) provide a good example of the experimental method that psychologists have used to study conformity. Sherif’s experimental protocol uses an optical illusion known as the “autokinetic effect.” When
people are placed in a darkened room and shown a stationary pinpoint of light, the
light usually appears to be moving. In Sherif’s experiments, several individuals
were placed in a darkened room and shown a spot of light. One of these individuals
was the real subject, and the others were Sherif’s confederates. The real and
counterfeit “subjects” were asked to estimate the distance that the light had traveled. The real subject gave his answer after all the confederates, who were instructed to give estimates very different from the usual estimates. Sherif, and other
researchers after him, found that the estimate given by the real subject tends to be
very close to that of the confederates, no matter how inaccurate theirs might be.
That is, the subjects’ opinions conform to those of the majority.
Sherif’s technique is unusual in that he used a fairly ambiguous estimation task.
In most of the work in this area, the naive subject is put in a situation in which there
is a sharp contrast between his own perceptions and the stated estimates of the
confederates. For example, Asch (1951) asked individuals to judge which of three
obviously different lines matched a fourth line which was exactly the same size as
one of the first three. The confederates chose one of the lines that did not match.
A sizable fraction of the subjects conformed to the opinion of the majority in this
experiment as well.
There are two different ways to understand these kinds of results. Some psychologists have argued that the subject is merely publicly complying with the opinion
of the majority, while privately maintaining his own opinion (Keisler and Keisler,
1969). Others think that the subject is genuinely unsure and uses the opinion of
others as a guide. In the second view, the results of Sherif and others are evidence
of the importance of social learning in adults (Thelen et al., 1979). It seems likely
that both effects are important. We would hypothesize that experiments like those
of Asch, in which the choice of confederates is obviously at variance with the
experience of the subject, probably represent public compliance, while experiments
like those of Sherif, in which the judgment task is ambiguous, are more likely to
represent the effects of cultural transmission.
Some of the best evidence that Sherif’s results represent the effects of cultural
transmission comes from an experiment conducted by Roher et al. (1954). The
members of two groups of subjects were individually placed in darkened rooms and
shown a moving light. In one group the light actually moved 2 inches; in the other
it moved 8 inches. On average, individuals in the first group estimated a substan-

tially smaller distance than individuals in the second group. Then pairs of individuals, one drawn from each group, were placed together in a room with a stationary
light and asked to repeatedly estimate the distance that the light traveled. As Table
7.4 shows, the mean values estimated by the two groups converged toward the
mean of the two values—exactly what one would expect if the process were

Empirical Research on Conformity

225

Table 7.4 Results of an experiment by Roher et al. (1954) showing the mutual
socialization of individuals drawn from different training regimes for an
ambiguous task
Mean Estimates of Individuals with

Alone
Together
1 Year Later

2 in. Training

8 in. Training

3.08
6.29
5.50

8.74
6.41
5.09

governed by linear horizontal transmission. One year after the original experiment,
subjects were retested individually; as is shown by the table, the estimates formed
by the cultural transmission process seemed quite stable.
In this experiment there is no “majority” to conform to—individuals modify
their estimates when exposed to others and then retain the modified judgments for
at least one year.
These experiments on conformity do not provide good evidence that conformist
cultural transmission exists. To demonstrate it, one would need to show that there

is a nonlinear effect of numbers of confederates on the acquisition of belief. The
numbers of confederates have been varied in several of the studies, but the results

are quite ambiguous. Moreover, in most cases the experimental protocol was like
Asch’s. In such experiments it is easy to imagine that what is being observed is
public compliance rather than the acquisition of a new belief through cultural
transmission.
The only evidence we know of that conformist transmission exists comes from
an experiment performed by Jacobs and Campbell (1961). They formed
“micro-societies” of two, three, or four individuals. During the first “generation”
there were one or two real subjects in each society, and the remainder were
confederates. Each society was subjected to the Sherif protocol described above.
Then, during the next generation, one of the confederates was removed and replaced by a real subject. This process was repeated until all of the confederates were
removed; from then on, in each generation a subject was removed and replaced with
another subject. The experiment continued for eleven “generations.”
Jacobs and Campbell began with the hypothesis that arbitrary traditions could be
perpetuated by social transmission. Their results (see Fig. 7.7) did not support their
hypothesis. In each experiment the mean estimate of the distance traveled by the
light decreases from the initial estimate given by the confederates to a stable,
constant value. Most of these results seem consistent with a model of transmission
plus relatively weak guided variation. For some reason, individuals left alone tend
to estimate the distance traveled at a stable value of 4 inches. In the micro-societies,

they inherit the views of their cultural parents and then modify them according to
their own judgments. Thus, the mean estimate moves a small distance toward the
value favored by individual decision making, 4 inches. Repeated over many generations, this process causes the mean to converge to a stable value of 4 inches.
One of the experimental treatments used by Jacobs and Campbell suggests the
existence of conformist transmission. Compare the results shown in Figure 7.7a

226

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

Q
3

o

o--0 C-]-0

14

o—o X -3-2

ommo CONFEDERATE

O
Hy

Tw
ple

ae

ne
Lu

ze
<I
uJ

=

le eo

(b) l6ro
we
Zz
O

14

Aa BOM), (Onna
GENERATIONS

amt

g2-3.C=1+0
oo

X-3-]

oo CONFEDERATE

Fan

=
ae
ieee
TE
zz
<
Ww

=

PR 23

A SG
rear SS
7 Ai
GENERATIONS
Fig. 7.7 The histories of individuals’ estimates of the distance traveled by a small light in a
dark room. Each line represents the estimates of a single individual during each generation that
the individual was present. The lines labeled C-1-0 represent the estimates of solitary control
individuals. Confederates always estimated 16 inches. The lines labeled X-3-2 in (a) are the

estimates of subjects in three-person groups initiated by two confederates and one subject. The
lines labeled X-3-1 in (b) are the estimates of subjects in three-person groups initiated by one
confederate and two subjects. (From Jacobs, R. C. and D. T. Campbell. 1961. The perpetuation
of an arbitrary tradition through several generations of laboratory microculture. J. Abn. Soc.
Psychol. 62: 649-658, figures 3 and 5. Copyright © 1961 the American Psychological
Association. )

with those in Figure 7.7b. In the former the micro-society was begun with two
confederates and one naive subject. The real subjects’ average estimate of the
distance that the light moved was 14-15 inches, very close to that of the confederates. This result contrasts with that shown in Figure 7.7b. Here the group was
begun with a single confederate and two subjects. In this case, the subjects’ initial
estimate averaged about 8 inches, substantially below that of the confederate. One
way to interpret this result is that there is a nonlinear effect of numbers; subjects
are disproportionately influenced by a majority of two compared to a minority of
one.
Clearly this single result is inconclusive. It is possible to provide other sensible
interpretations. However, this experimental protocol could easily be used to determine whether conformist transmission is acting in this situation. One would need
to begin societies with a wider range of combinations of subjects and confederates.
For example, using societies of five and six individuals, the experimenter could

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

227

vary the initial number of confederates from zero to four and zero to five. The effect
of the confederates on the estimates of the subjects could be estimated and the
existence of a nonlinear effect of numbers confirmed or rejected. Jacobs and
Campbell’s protocol is especially useful because the use of several generations
amplifies the effect of weak forces, making them easier to detect.

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

In this section we argue that the models of frequency-dependent bias developed so
far in this chapter provide an attractive explanation of the otherwise puzzling fact
that humans engage in self-sacrificial cooperation in large groups. We begin by
defining the problem cooperation presents to theories that posit a selfish human
nature. Next, we briefly outline why many biologists believe that evolution should
have led to a selfish human nature. Then, we show that one of the by-products of
conformist frequency-dependent bias is an increase in the strength of the group
selection of cultural variation so that it may be a strong force relative to forces
acting within groups, such as direct bias and natural selection. Since selection
between groups may favor beliefs and attitudes which benefit the group at the
expense of the individual, this provides an explanation for human cooperation.
Conformist transmission may be favored by natural selection even though it has this
deleterious effect for individuals, because it increases the chance of acquiring
locally adaptive cultural variants in a heterogeneous environment.

Cooperation and public goods
Throughout this chapter, we assume that social cooperation entails the production
of what economists call “public goods” and that in large groups, rational selfish
individuals will not voluntarily cooperate to produce public goods. A rational,
self-interested individual seeks to maximize his own personal welfare and is indifferent to changes in the welfare of others (except perhaps his genetic relatives).
Public goods are characterized by two features: “jointness of supply” and lack of
“exclusiveness.” Jointness of supply means that the consumption of a unit of the
good by one individual does not reduce the amount of the good remaining for others
to consume a full unit. This is not true of an ordinary good such as gasoline. When
someone burns a gallon of gasoline, that reduces the supply of gasoline available
for others by one gallon. In contrast, someone’s “consumption” of a public good
like clean air or public safety does not affect the amount of this good available to
others. Lack of exclusiveness means that once a public good is produced it is
difficult to prevent other members of the group from benefiting by it.
Many of the fruits of social cooperation are public goods. The modern state
provides law and order within its boundaries and protection from attacks by other
countries; labor unions provide higher wages and cartels higher prices. In each
case, large groups of unrelated individuals cooperate to pursue a common goal. The
achievement of these goals leads to benefits that flow to all members of the group
without regard to their contribution.

228

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

Cooperation and the paradoxical nature of self-interest
Most economists believe that rational, selfish individuals will not voluntarily invest
in the provision of public goods in large groups, except in special circumstances
(Buchanan, 1968; Olson, 1971; for a contrary view see Taylor, 1976). To see why,

consider the following hypothetical example. First, suppose that two pastoralists,
Pete and Rob, quarter their identically sized herds together each night in a given
meadow. The animals must be guarded to prevent losses to predators. We suppose
each pastoralist has two alternatives: either he guards the herd (labeled c, for
cooperate) or he does not (labeled d, for defect). The reduction in losses to the
entire herd due to a single pastoralist’s efforts at guarding are assumed to be R, and
the cost of guarding I. The payoffs to Pete are shown in Table 7.5. Suppose that
the benefits of guarding the herd exceed the cost; this means that & > I. Even if
this is true, Pete will not be motivated to guard the herd unless R/2 > I. If

R/2 <I, Pete is better off not guarding whether or not Rob guards (since R/2 < I
implies that R/2 — I < 0). Rob faces a similar matrix of payoffs. He will not
guard if R/2 <I, and the result is that both will achieve a payoff of zero. This is
true even though both would be better off if they both guarded. Readers acquainted
with game theory will recognize this situation as the Prisoner’s Dilemma.

Table 7.5 Payoffs for two pastoralists who may guard (c) or not guard (d) their
jointly pastured herd
Rob’s Behavior
Pete’s Behavior

d

Cc

d
Cc

0
R/2—1

R/2
R —I1

Now let us generalize this model to a group of N pastoralists. Each pastoralist
who chooses c reduces the predation losses of the entire herd an amount & and pays
a cost I. The payoffs to Pete assuming that JW pastoralists choose to guard the herd
are given in Table 7.6. Pete’s choice in the N-person case is similar to the twoperson case. As long as R/N < I, Pete achieves a higher payoff by defecting no
matter what the other members of the group choose. Since each member of the
group faces the same choice, the outcome will be that no one will guard the herd.
Notice that if N is large, this may occur even though the aggregate benefits that
result from guarding the herd could be many times higher than the aggregate costs.
Because of this logic, groups of rational, selfish individuals may forgo actions that
would be extremely beneficial to every member of the group. The fact that the
Table 7.6 Payoff schedule for a pastoralist who may guard (c) or not guard (d) a
joint herd when J of the N other owners guard
Payoff to Pete
Pete’s Choice

d
é

if At Others Guard

R(M/N)
OUMs aL)

Noa

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

229

temptation to defect will tend to increase as the size of the group increases makes
it especially difficult to explain patriotism or ethnocentrism as the result of rational
self-interest.
This very simple model has been extended in a variety of ways by political
scientists and economists interested in public choice. (For a recent survey of this
literature see Hardin, 1982.) Perhaps because voluntary provision of public goods
is So widely observed, many of these authors have searched for, and found, special
conditions that can lead to cooperation (e.g. Hirshleifer, 1983). Nonetheless, on

balance the public choice literature suggests that voluntary provision of public
goods should be rare. Here we will consider only two of these extensions, the
punishment of noncooperators and repeated interactions.

The effect of coercion. It might be argued that individuals cooperate in order to
avoid punishment by other members of their own group. This notion seems plausible based on common

experience.

However,

it does not solve the theoretical

problem; it only raises the new problem of why individuals should cooperate to
punish other individuals. To see this, suppose that the pastoralists have the opportunity to punish others who did not guard the herd. Suppose that each punisher
punishes one defector and that the cost of being punished is %. Then, on average,
punishment will reduce the payoffs of defectors an amount HH/(N — Al), where
H{ is the number of punishers and N —
the number of defectors. Finally, assume
that the cost of punishing is ¥. Then the payoffs for each of Pete’s possible choices
of behavior are given in Table 7.7.
Table 7.7 Payoff schedule for a pastoralist with the possibility of punishment for
not guarding
Payoff to Pete Assuming
At Others Guard and # Others Punish

Pete’s Choice
Guard but
don’t punish

c/n

Guard and
punish

c/p

R(M+1)/N

Don’t guard and
don’t punish

d/n

R(M/N)

Don’t guard
but punish

d/p

R(M+1)/N

R(M/N)

— I

—1-

¥

— DBH/(N-M)

— DHK+1)/(N-M)

—

There are two things to notice about these expressions. First, it is clear that if
enough members of the group choose to punish, Pete will be better off if he
cooperates. However, Pete is always worse off if he chooses to punish. Thus, it is
irrational to punish. Since all the members of the group face the same choice, no
one will punish, but this means that there is no reason to cooperate. In essence,
punishment itself is an investment in the production of another public good, the
amount of cooperation in the group. Each potential punisher can have only a small
incremental effect on the number of cooperators, and again, the cost to the individ-

230

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

ual participating in the punishment of another could be substantial. The rational,
selfish individual would let the other guy do the punishing.
Repeated interactions and reciprocity. Some authors (e.g. Trivers, 1971; Flinn and
Alexander, 1982) have asserted that repeated interactions among a large but finite
group of rational, selfish individuals may lead to voluntary cooperation via reciprocity. This assertion is not supported by existing theoretical results. The theory
of the repeated interaction of pairs of individuals is fairly well developed (Shubik,
1970; Taylor, 1976; Axelrod, 1980, 1984; Axelrod and Hamilton,

1981). These

studies indicate that selection can favor the evolution of reciprocal strategies which
lead to cooperation. The theory of repeated interactions in larger groups is much
less fully developed. The best study (Taylor, 1976) indicates that repeated interactions can lead to cooperation, but that the reciprocal arrangements are complex
and seemingly quite delicate, and that these difficulties increase as group size
increases. Given that humans often do cooperate in very large groups, it would
seem useful to pursue other possible explanations.
Group selection and the evolution of cooperation

One way to explain the evolution of altruistic cooperation in the human species is
to imagine that group selection (acting on genes which affect behavioral propensities) is an important force in human evolution. Group selection occurs whenever the fitness of an individual depends on the behaviors of other individuals in a
local group. In the case of cooperative production of a public good, the fitness of
an individual depends on the number of cooperators in the group. If the incremental
benefit of investing in the public good exceeds its incremental cost (e.g. R > Lin
the example of the last section), then groups with more than the average number
of cooperators have higher average fitness. Such groups contribute disproportionately to the next generation, and thus selection among groups increases
the frequency of cooperation. However, because cooperators have lower fitness
than other members of their own group, selection within groups decreases the
frequency of cooperators within each group. Cooperation will increase in the whole
population only if selection among groups is a stronger force than selection within
groups.
The strength of selection among groups depends (among other things) on the
amount of genetic variation that exists among groups; the more genetic variation
among groups, the stronger the force of group selection. If all groups have the same
frequency of cooperators, or if the differences do not have a genetic basis, selection
cannot act to increase the frequency of cooperative genotypes. Genetic variation
among groups is created by sampling error caused by finite populations (genetic
drift) and the process of creation of new groups. Variation is destroyed by selection
within groups, selection between groups, and migration among them.
Models of group selection can be conveniently divided into two classes (Wade,
1978b) based on the processes which create and maintain variation among groups.

1. In “intrademic” group selection models, groups are assumed to be quite small
and the amount of migration among groups to be quite large; thus, a large amount

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

231

of variation among groups is created and destroyed every generation. A variety of
theoretical studies have shown that intrademic group selection can be effective in
increasing the frequency of cooperative behaviors if (1) groups are small or (2) the
process by which groups are formed causes cooperators to be more likely to interact
with each other than chance alone would dictate (Wilson, 1975, 1977, 1980, 1983;
Hamilton, 1975; Matessi and Jayakar, 1976; Uyenoyama, 1979; Wade, 1978a;

Michod, 1982).
2. In “interdemic” group selection it is assumed that groups are relatively large
and that migration among groups is quite small; thus, only a small amount of
variation is created and destroyed each generation. A number of theoretical studies
suggest that interdemic group selection can be effective only if the process of
creation of new groups creates substantial variation, there are large differences in
the mean fitness of subpopulations, and migration rates are very low (e.g. Eshel,
1972; Levin and Kilmer, 1974; Maynard Smith, 1976; Slatkin and Wade, 1978;
Boorman and Levitt, 1980; Aoki, 1982a, 1982b; Crow and Aoki, 1982; see Wade,
1978, and Uyenoyama and Feldman, 1980, for reviews).

Taken together these results suggest that altruistic cooperation in large groups of
genetically unrelated individuals is unlikely to evolve. This deduction is supported
by the fact that altruistic cooperation among large groups of unrelated individuals
has not been observed except in the human species (Williams, 1966). If this
deduction is correct, much of human cooperative behavior is not genetically adaptive under contemporary conditions. Modern humans cooperate in very large
groups with extensive gene flow between them, despite the fact that in theory
neither intrademic nor interdemic group selection can favor altruistic cooperation
under these conditions.
Several authors have argued that group selection was a more important influence
on human evolution in the past. For example, W. D. Hamilton (1975) argues that
the population structure that probably characterized food-foraging hominids during
the middle and late Pleistocene (small, partly isolated groups who exchanged mates
with their nearest neighbors) was ideally suited to maximizing selection between
groups. Pierre van den Berghe (1981) makes a similar argument. Richard Alexander (1971, 1979a; also see Alexander and Tinkle, 1968) argues that the human

ability to make weapons greatly increased the amount of intergroup conflict, and
that such conflict is an especially effective agent of selection at the group level.
These authors imagine that contemporary humans retain a genetically transmitted
predisposition to cooperate, even though contemporary human population structures would not permit either mode of group selection to favor the cooperative
behavior.
While these hypotheses are certainly plausible, they are very unattractive (Alexander, 1979a: 222). Since we cannot observe human behavior under late Pleis-

tocene food-foraging conditions, we have very little way of knowing what the
population structure was like or if it was sufficient to permit the evolution of the
altruism that these authors envision. Moreover, if the hypothesis is correct it greatly
weakens the explanatory power of sociobiological theory because we can no longer
assume that behavior observed in different societies can be predicted by what
maximizes fitness in the local environment. Given these problems it seems reason-

232

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

able to consider an alternative hypothesis based on the dynamics of cultural transmission.
Conformist transmission and group selection

The theoretical argument against group selection is based on models which assume
genetic inheritance. The same conclusions may not hold for culturally transmitted
traits. We have already seen that conformist transmission can act to amplify differences in the frequency of cultural variants in different subpopulations. This suggests that selection among subpopulations might be more effective in the presence
of conformist transmission. In this section we will analyze a model of interdemic
group selection acting on a cultural trait which shows that this intuition is correct,
when there is conformist transmission, interdemic group selection can be a strong
force in determining the eventual equilibrium of the population, even when subpopulations are arbitrarily large, extinction rates are small, and migration rates are
substantial.
We make two modifications to the model of conformist cultural transmission
presented in a previous section. First, we assume that s;, the selection differential

of the cultural variant c, equals s and is negative in every subpopulation. This
means that noncooperators (d individuals) are favored by natural selection in every
subpopulation. Second, we assume that occasionally one of the subpopulations
becomes extinct, leaving an empty habitat which is then recolonized by individuals
from the surviving subpopulations. The probability that the ith subpopulation
becomes extinct during any given generation is assumed to be a monotonically
decreasing function of the frequency of c during that generation p;, labeled @(p;).
This means that increasing the proportion of defectors in a subpopulation increases
the probability that the subpopulation becomes extinct. For the present, this extinction may be thought of as involving the actual deaths of the individuals in the
extinct population. Later in the chapter, however, we will argue that “cultural
extinction” need not involve any actual mortality.
Equilibrium in a single subpopulation. Under what conditions will selection
among subpopulations be stronger than selection within subpopulations? To answer
this question we first determine the equilibrium of the population in the absence of
any extinctions, and then assume that extinctions occur so infrequently that the
population as a whole reaches equilibrium before the next extinction occurs. The
assumed combination of very large subpopulations and very infrequent extinctions
weakens the action of group selection, and in genetic models would result in group
selection’s being of negligible importance. Next, we determine if an equilibrium
composed exclusively of defectors is unstable, so that cooperation can increase
when rare.
Suppose that the values of the frequency-dependent bias parameter, D, the
selection coefficient, s, and the migration rate, m, are such that the equilibrium of
the ith population can be determined using Equation 7.14. Further, imagine that all
of the subpopulations except subpopulation i are at equilibrium, and that the
frequency in the whole population is p. In this case, the equilibrium of the ith
subpopulation depends on its initial frequency. If the initial frequency is greater

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

233

than p,, the unstable “threshold equilibrium,” the subpopulation will reach a stable
equilibrium with cooperators at a high frequency, p,. We will refer to such subpopulations as “cooperator equilibria.” If the initial frequency of cooperators is less
than p,, the subpopulation will achieve a stable “defector equilibrium” with a low
frequency of cooperators, py.

Equilibrium of the entire population. These results about the equilibrium of a
single subpopulation can be used heuristically to determine the equilibrium for the
entire population. First, note that conditions in each of the subpopulations are
identical. Thus all of the subpopulations must be in one or two equilibrium states.
The function f(p;) has an internal minimum labeled P; and an internal maximum

labeled P.. If the mean frequency of cooperators, p, in the whole population is
greater than R. or less than P,, then only one stable subpopulation equilibrium exists,
and therefore all subpopulations must be at the same frequency. Label this frequency p’. Since all subpopulations are identical, the entire population can be in

equilibrium only if f(p’) = p*. This occurs only for p’ = 1 and p’ = 0. Thus, for
P; > p the only possible stable equilibrium occurs when the entire population is
composed entirely of defectors. If P. > p > Pj, then two stable equilibria are
possible. We will denote the frequency of variant c at these equilibria as p.(p) and
Pa(p) to emphasize the fact that the equilibrium frequency of c in any subpopulation
depends on the mean frequency of c in the population as a whole. See Figure 7.3c
for a graphical illustration of this situation. Let
be the fraction of the subpopulations that are at the cooperative equilibrium, p,(p). An internal equilibrium
for the entire population will exist if

bp.(p) + (1 — )pa(p) = Pp

(7.19)

Satisfying Condition 7.19 does not assure that an equilibrium is stable or that it can
be reached from any particular initial condition. Computer simulations indicate,
however, that such equilibria are stable once they are reached, and that most initial

configurations for which P. > (1/n)2;- \p; > P; result in an internal equilibrium of
the kind described by Equation 7.19. These simulations also indicate that the
graphical method outlined in a previous section gives very good approximations for
the values of p, and py, even when the number of subpopulations is as small as ten.

Adding extinctions. Now consider the effect of an occasional rare extinction on a
population that has achieved an internal equilibrium. A proportion ¢ of the subpopulations are assumed to be at an internal equilibrium p, and a fraction (1 — >)
are at pg. The internal unstable equilibrium is p,. The extinction of a subpopulation
leaves an empty habitat that is colonized by individuals from the other subpopulations. After extinction and colonization, both the subpopulation and the
population as a whole will return toward a stable equilibrium. This equilibrium may
not be identical to the one that existed before the extinction. Suppose a cooperator
subpopulation goes extinct and is replaced at the new equilibrium by a defector
subpopulation. This changes the mean frequency of cooperators from p to a slightly
smaller value. This in turn changes the possible stable equilibria to slightly lower
values and reduces the frequency of cooperative subpopulations after extinction. If

234

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

a defector subpopulation goes extinct and is replaced by a cooperative one, then a
new equilibrium is reached, characterized by slightly increased values of these
quantities.
The conditions under which cooperation may increase. What is the long-run net
effect of changes caused by extinctions on the evolution of the entire population?
The eventual equilibrium in the subpopulation undergoing colonization is determined by the frequency of cooperators among the colonizers, p.. Let A(x) be the
probability that p, is greater than x. If p. < p,, then the population will move toward
a defector equilibrium. If p. > p;, the new equilibrium will be cooperative. Let 6’
be the proportion of cooperative subpopulations after the extinction. The expected
value of ’, E{d’}, is given by

E{b'} = o[1 — €(p.)] + SEPIA) + CL — SEPIA)

— (7-20)

The fraction of cooperative subpopulations may be expected to increase if

A(p,) >

b€é(p.)
b€E(p.) + (1 — b)E(pa)

(7.21)

The right-hand side of 7.21 gives the fraction of all extinctions that occur in
subpopulations in equilibrium at a value p.. Since we assume that the extinction rate
is a monotonically decreasing function of the frequency of cooperators, this quantity is always less than o. The left-hand side of 7.21 is the probability that a habitat
recently vacated by extinction will achieve a cooperative equilibrium after recolonization. Thus, if the probability that a cooperative subpopulation will be
formed after an extinction exceeds the probability that cooperative subpopulations
become extinct (for a given value of ), then the frequency of cooperators in the
whole population will increase.
The evolution of the population as a whole depends critically on the magnitude
of A(p,), which in turn depends on the mode of colonization. Recently vacated
habitats could conceivably be recolonized in a variety of ways. The number of
subpopulations contributing colonizers may vary. The absolute number of colonizers might also be small and variable, and colonizers might not represent an
unbiased sample of the population. We will assume the following model. Let g(j)
give the probability that a large number of colonizers are drawn at random from j
subpopulations (j = 1,. . .,n). Then for small values of o,

A(p) ~ gb

(7.22)

In this case, 7.21 reduces to the following expression:

:

(1) >

EP)
€ (Pa)

ees

(

)

Inequality 7.23 says that cooperators can increase in the population when rare if the
ratio of the extinction rate of cooperative subpopulations to that of defector subpopulations is less than the probability that colonizers are drawn from a single
subpopulation. It can also be shown that whenever extinction and recolonization
make
= 0 an unstable equilibrium, @ = 1 is a stable equilibrium.

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

235

It is important to remember that Condition 7.23 requires that D, s, and m be such

that both cooperative and noncooperative equilibria exist for all values of p. Given
that this is the case, however, these conditions are nearly independent of the relative
magnitudes of s and €(p,). Conformist transmission “decouples” the processes of
individual and group selection near the boundaries @ = 0 and
= 1. This will not
be true for other values of h. Here A will depend on p,, which in turn depends on
the relative magnitudes of s, D, and m.
Another remarkable feature about Condition 7.23 is that it depends on the ratio
of the extinction rates. In conventional models, the strengths of both group and
individual selection depend on the ratios of survival rates of groups and individuals.
This difference is important because the probabilities of extinction might be very
low, and at the same time the ratio €(p,.)/(py) might be much less than one. For

example, suppose that the survival rate of cooperative subpopulations is 0.9999 and
that of noncooperative subpopulations is 0.99. The ratio of the extinction rates is
0.01, and therefore cooperation will increase if only 1 percent of the empty habitats
are colonized by a single subpopulation.
We have been unable to derive general conditions under which the combination
of conformist transmission and group selection would favor the increase of cooperators. The heuristic argument outlined above suggests, however, that the following
conditions favor the establishment of cooperators in a population:
1. The parameters D, s, and m must be such that both cooperator and defector

equilibria can coexist when cooperators are rare. This requires that the conformist
effect be substantially stronger than selection and migration. The formal condition

is (1 — D/s)*/8(D/s) > (m/s).
2. The mode of colonization should lead to a significant probability that colonizers are drawn from a single subpopulation.
3. The ratio of the extinction rates of cooperator and defector subpopulations
should be significantly less than one, but the extinction rates themselves need not
be large.

If conformist transmission is a significant force acting on the frequency of traits
within subpopulations, and if the mode of colonization is favorable, group selection
can increase the frequency of cooperators. This can occur even if extinction rates
are very low, migration rates are substantial, and subpopulations are very large.
Without conformist transmission, selection and migration constantly erode the
variation between subpopulations. We have also shown elsewhere that conformist
transmission can protect variation between groups against direct biases that favor
the defector variant (Boyd and Richerson,

1982). Extinction must be frequent

enough to balance these processes. Strong conformist transmission creates the
possibility that subpopulations may be maintained indefinitely with a high frequency of cooperators. Whether cooperators then increase depends on the relative
extinction rates of cooperator and defector subpopulations and the probability that
recolonized subpopulations achieve a cooperative equilibrium.

A qualitative interpretation of the model

The empirical facts of human cooperation do not seem easily reconciled with the
view that human nature is egoistic. Any alternative view that holds that humans are

236

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

by nature cooperative must overcome two related difficulties. First, it must be able
to account for the evolution of humans who cooperate on a large scale with
genetically unrelated individuals. Second, given that individuals belong to many
different groups with potentially conflicting goals, it must specify with which group
(or groups) an individual will identify. The model of cultural group selection
provides one explanation that overcomes both these problems.
The main requirement of the model is that humans inherit at least some portion
of the values, goals, and beliefs that determine their choices by way of conformist
cultural transmission. To explain the evolution of human cooperation, we need to
account for the evolution of a human capacity for culture which is characterized by
the conformist effect. We have seen that conformist transmission may be favored
in spatially variable environments because it provides a simple, general rule that
increases the probability of acquiring behaviors favored in the local habitat. It is
plausible that averaged over many traits and many societies this effect could
compensate for what is, from the genes’ “point of view,” the excessive cooperation
that also may result from conformist transmission.

Cultural endogamy. To deal with the question of conflicting goals, we must
interpret the results of our very simple model in terms of the complexity of social
reality. Under specified conditions, group selection acting on cultural variation
favors cooperators, individuals whose behavior reduces their own welfare but
increases the probability that their subpopulation will escape extinction. The key
defining characteristic of the subpopulation is that it is completely mixed; sets of
parents are drawn at random from the pool of individuals within it. In contrast, the
flow of cultural traits between subpopulations is restricted, since migration rates are
less than one. We shall say that the subpopulation is “culturally endogamous.” In
human societies, individuals can belong to many social groupings, of varying sizes
and purposes, and with varying criteria for membership. Our model suggests that
humans will engage in behaviors that promote the interests of a particular group as
a whole only if (1) they acquire behaviors culturally from other members of the
group via conformist cultural transmission and (2) the group is culturally endogamous. These characteristics, taken together, specify the group with which individuals should identify.
Different social groupings may be culturally endogamous for some traits but not
for others. For traits that are acquired by young children from members of their
family, the culturally endogamous group might be very similar to the genetic deme.
That is, an individual’s cultural parents would be drawn from the same social
grouping as its genetic parents. The culturally endogamous group for a trait acquired disproportionately from parents of one sex may be different from the culturally endogamous group for traits acquired from parents of both sexes. For
example, suppose that beliefs about what constitutes acceptable behavior during
warfare are acquired exclusively from males. In patrilocal societies, the culturally
endogamous group for these beliefs could be very small (so small as to require
substantial amendments to the model). In the same societies, the culturally endog-

amous group for behaviors acquired from both sexes—for example, language or
religious beliefs—could be very large. In contrast, in matrilocal societies, the
culturally endogamous group might be the same for warfare, language, and re-

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

237

ligion. For traits acquired as an adult, the culturally endogamous group may be
different again. For example, many aspects of individual behavior in modern
corporations, including professional goals, work norms, and beliefs about the
nature of the product and the marketplace, are acquired culturally from individuals
who precede them in the firm (Van Maanen and Schein, 1979). For these behaviors,

the culturally endogamous group may be the firm. Other examples of groups that
may be culturally endogamous for certain traits include fraternal organizations,
craft guilds, and, of course, academic disciplines.

Cultural extinction does not require mortality. When there is conformist transmission, the extinction of a group need not entail the physical death of individuals;
the breakup of the group as a coherent social unit and the dispersal of its members
to other groups will suffice. Imagine that the members of an “extinct” subpopulation are dispersed randomly to all the other subpopulations. Because the
members of a subpopulation are either mostly cooperators or mostly defectors, this
will change the frequency of cooperators in the pool of migrants during the generation in which the extinction takes place. This will perturb each of the subpopulations from its equilibrium value, but since each subpopulation is small
compared to the whole, the perturbation will be small. Each subpopulation will
reach the same equilibrium that it would have reached if the members of the extinct
group had never entered it. Intuitively, the dispersal of a group is equivalent to
extinction because conformist transmission favors the more common variant. Cooperators persist in cooperative groups because they are common in those groups.
If they are dispersed, their numbers will usually be insufficient to cause the frequency of cooperators in defector groups to exceed the threshold necessary to cause
a change to a cooperative equilibrium, and vice versa.
To put this in more concrete terms, consider the following hypothetical example.
Suppose that the cultural trait in question affects the rotation period in a swidden
agricultural system. Defectors have a cultural variant that causes them to have a
shorter rotation period. Occasionally, when coupled with especially unfavorable
weather, this causes a temporary failure of the agricultural system in the entire
subpopulation. It is unlikely that this would lead to the actual extinction of the
group. Rather, members would disperse, different families attempting to join other
groups. In any particular new group, the immigrants form only a small proportion
of the group, so that, if conformist transmission is important, they will have little
effect on the subsequent agricultural practices in the group. Clearly, this is only one
of many patterns of dispersal that might actually take place. Different patterns will
lead to different outcomes. For another example, involving a reinterpretation of
Rappaport’s (1968) study of the Maring, see Peoples (1982).
The model suggests that group selection is more effective when vacant habitats
are recolonized by individuals drawn from a single subpopulation. This model of
colonization seems plausible in the human case for several reasons: first, in a social
species in which division of labor and cooperative subsistence activities are important, it seems likely that a cohesive social unit drawn from a single parent
population will typically emigrate to colonize empty habitats. Second, even if a
vacant habitat is colonized by groups that originated in more than one subpopulation, behavioral isolating mechanisms may prevent them from fusing to form

238

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

a new culturally endogamous group. Finally, warfare may play an important role
in determining group survival. Defeated groups may be dispersed and replaced by
individuals from the victorious group.

Evolution of ethnic cooperation
One human grouping that seems to satisfy the requirements of the model is the
ethnic group. The flow of cultural traits within the ethnic group is often much
greater than the flow between ethnic groups. The model predicts that group selection acting on culturally transmitted traits will favor cooperative behavior within
ethnic groups and noncooperative behavior toward members of other groups. Table
7.8 lists the traits identified with the syndrome of ethnocentrism in LeVine and
Campbell (1972). In their book, LeVine and Campbell review the evidence that this
syndrome is a very common characteristic of human ethnic groups and the theories
that have been advanced to explain it. The list of behaviors in Table 7.8 seems
consistent with the predictions of the model. Sanctions against theft and murder
within the group provide civil order, a public good benefiting group members. This
contrasts with the lack of sanctions protecting outgroup members. Moreover,
cooperative behavior typifies interactions between group members, and lack of
cooperation typifies interactions between members of different groups. Finally,
individuals are willing to fight and die for their own group in warfare against other
groups. In recent times, actions on behalf of the ethnic group have often been taken
in direct opposition to the authority and power of the modern state—witness
movements for ethnic autonomy in many parts of the world today. It also must be
kept in mind that the groups in question are often very large. In such large groups,
it is hard to imagine that any kind of reciprocal arrangement is responsible for the
observed behavior. These generalizations about human ethnocentrism suggest that
the ethnic group is one locus of altruistic behavior.
The variation in behavior toward ethnic group members also provides some
support for the hypothesis that group selection acting on culturally transmitted
behavior has shaped human behavior. LeVine and Campbell categorized social
structures as “socially divisive” and “socially integrative”:
The former type of society has structural features such as patrilocality or local
group endogamy that foster the development of a parochial loyalty structure. . . . In the socially integrated type, the dispersion of males . . . fosters
the development of loyalties to wider groupings. . . . Since the socially divisive societies have warfare among segments of the ethnic community, and the
socially integrated societies do not, the social structures are seen as favoring
different norms of conduct concerning social intercourse within the ethnic
community. [P. 53, emphasis ours]

They go on to argue that while socially divisive societies are characterized by
extensive feuding and violence, they are infrequently involved in large-scale warfare, and when they are involved in warfare, alliances are formed opportunistically
on the basis of immediate military contingencies. In contrast, while socially integrative societies have much less violence within groups, they readily cooperate in
large-scale conflict. LeVine and Campbell cite Noberini’s (1966) cross-cultural

Conformist Transmission and Cultural Group Selection

239

Table 7.8 Traits identified with the syndrome of ethnocentrism by LeVine
and
Campbell (1972)
Attitudes and Behaviors

toward Ingroup
See selves as virtuous and

superior.

Attitudes and Behaviors

toward Outgroup
See outgroup as contemptible, immoral, and inferior.

See own standards of value
as universal, intrinsically
true. See own customs as
original, centrally human.

See selves as strong.

See outgroup as weak.

Social distance.
Outgroup hate.
Sanctions against ingroup
theft.

Sanctions for outgroup theft
or absence of sanctions
against.

Sanctions against ingroup
murder.

Sanctions for outgroup murder or absence of sanctions
against outgroup member.

Cooperative relations with ingroup members.

Absence of cooperation with
outgroup members.

Obedience to ingroup authorities.

Absence of obedience to out-

Willingness to remain an ingroup member.

Absence of conversion to
outgroup membership.

Willingness to fight and die
for ingroup.

Absence of willingness to
fight and die for outgroups.

group authorities.

Virtue in killing outgroup
members in warfare.
Use of outgroups as bad examples in the training of
children.
Blaming of outgroup for ingroup troubles.
Distrust and fear of the outgroup.

240

Frequency-dependent Bias and the Evolution of Cooperation

study of warfare as supporting this view. Again, it appears that the unit upon which
group selection has worked is the culturally endogamous groups. If this unit is
small, as in the case of socially divisive societies, then so is the unit within which

social cooperation takes place. In socially integrated societies, the culturally endogamous unit is larger (at least with regard to traits transmitted by men) and so is the
scale of violent conflict.
Conclusion

The simple model of cultural group selection outlined here clearly is not verified
by the data concerning ethnic cooperation. Nor is it a complete hypothesis to
account for cooperative behavior in humans. The real world is undoubtedly much
more complex than our representation of it. However,

the model does illustrate

what we believe is a crucial property of the evolution of cultural species: if the rules
of cultural transmission are different from the rules of genetic transmission, similar
selective regimes may result in very different equilibria. The model also provides
a qualitative prediction about the kind of transmission rules that might explain
human cooperative behavior; that is, a cultural transmission rule that increases the
frequency of the more common variant can cause group selection to be a strong
force in determining the kinds of behaviors that characterize different human
societies.

8
Indirect Bias and the

Evolution of Symbolic Traits
. -what are the advantages which we propose by that great purpose of human

life which we call bettering our condition? To be observed, to be attended to,

to be taken notice of with sympathy, complacency and approbation, are all the
advantages we can propose to derive from it.
Adam Smith, 1790, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (p. 121, 6th ed.)

The utilitarian view of human society propounded by Adam Smith in the Wealth
of Nations is still important in the social sciences. It forms the basis of much of
Western economic theory which, according to its practitioners, successfully explains much of human behavior in economic contexts. It has also been used by
economists (e.g. Posner,

1980; Becker,

1981), political scientists (e.g. Hardin,

1982), sociologists (e.g. Goode, 1978), and anthropologists (e.g. Schneider, 1974)
to explain human behavior in many noneconomic contexts.
As many authors have pointed out (e.g. Rosenberg, 1980b), however, utilitarian

theories typically are incomplete because (1) they do not specify people’s preferences in sufficient detail and (2) they do not explain why people have the preferences they do. These are very serious shortcomings. Without some constraint on
the nature of preferences, virtually any observed behavior can be rationalized.
Economists, for example, usually assume that individuals strive for material wellbeing, for wealth and leisure (e.g. Stigler and Becker, 1977). Many of the things
people do seem to contradict this view of human nature. Why should someone risk
his or her life to reach the summit of Mount Everest or to save an unknown stranger
drowning in a frozen river? Other things people do, while not directly deleterious,
do not seem very closely related to material well-being. Why should some people
spend a third of their income to own a classic Porsche or to collect period furniture?
Can these behaviors be explained within the economist’s paradigm without simply
defining people’s preferences in terms of their behavior?
One approach is to suppose that, as Adam Smith (1790) suggested, people want
those things that cause them “to be observed, to be attended to with sympathy,
complacency and approbation. . .” In short, people value prestige, and they do
things like climbing mountains and buying fancy cars because such behaviors are
effective in gaining prestige. The problem with this approach is that it solves one
problem by creating two more. First, we do not know why some things are
prestigious and others not. Why should we admire people who risk their lives
climbing mountains but not people who risk their lives running across freeways?

241

242

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

Second, we do not have any explanations, other than introspection, why people
should value prestige. Clearly, what is really required is a theory of preferences that
predicts what people will value.
As Jack Hirshleifer (1977) has noted, sociobiological theory provides one attractive basis for such a theory; humans are hypothesized to strive to maximize their
inclusive fitness because this tendency has evolved through natural selection. If
sociobiological theory is correct, we should be able to predict people’s choices (at
least on the average) by asking what maximizes their reproductive success. This
will often be difficult, and therefore actual predictions may be ambiguous. But at
least sociobiology does provide a complete utilitarian theory.
In the context of the current problem, however, it seems difficult to see how

climbing Mount Everest or owning a Porsche increases an individual’s reproductive
success. In fact, it seems likely that the resources consumed in these endeavors
could be put to much better uses. One could argue that these kinds of behavior are
the result of sexual selection; perhaps these behaviors enhance a male’s reproductive success because females prefer men who do such things. There are
several difficulties with this kind of explanation. The most obvious is that some
women like to climb mountains and many like to drive fancy cars. It is also doubtful
that in many cases (like mountain climbing) there is any correlation between the
prestige gained and mating success. Finally, why should females prefer males who
do stupid things? Would they not be better off choosing males who demonstrate
their prowess at productive endeavors like making money or caring for children?
In his book Culture and Practical Reason, Marshall Sahlins (1976a) argues that
cultural processes define preferences and that any form of utilitarian analysis must
be derived, therefore, from cultural processes rather than vice versa. Moreover, he

asserts that culture is constituted of conventional symbols, so humans are very
largely free to develop meaningful systems of culture, only broadly constrained by
the imperatives of the natural world expressed through natural selection or other
utilitarian principles. In his words,
[T]he practical interest of men in production is symbolically constituted. The
finalities as well as the modalities of production come from the cultural side:
the material means of the cultural organization as well as the organization of the
material means. We have seen that nothing in the way of their capacity to satisfy
a material (biological) requirement can explain why pants are produced for men
and skirts for women, or why dogs are inedible but the hindquarters of the steer
are supremely satisfying of the need to eat. [P. 207]

However, Sahlins does not give a satisfactory account of the cultural processes that
generate particular patterns of preferences in different societies.
In this chapter we will analyze a model. of cultural transmission with indirect
bias. This model can explain why people value prestige and why certain traits are
effective in garnering prestige. Under some assumptions, the model is consistent
with the sociobiological expectation that human culture is adaptive, but under
others it allows cultural processes a causal autonomy similar to that envisioned by
Sahlins. Often it seems that culture can be autonomous and adaptive. We begin by
setting up the model of indirect bias and deducing the kinds of cultural forces that
result. We then go on to argue that indirect bias, like frequency-dependent bias,

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

243

provides a simple, general rule by which a naive individual can increase the chance
of acquiring a locally favored cultural variant without directly evaluating the merit
of alternative variants. This result allows us to understand both the evolution of the
desire for prestige and why certain characters come to be prestigious. We will then
show that under some conditions indirectly biased cultural transmission leads to a
dynamic analogous in some ways to the process of “runaway” sexual selection first
elucidated by R. A. Fisher (1958). This can cause the characters that act as markers

of prestige to become exaggerated and “maladaptive.” The runaway process is a
mechanism that may roughly correspond to the autonomous causal force postulated
by Sahlins and other symbolic anthropologists.

Defining indirect bias

In defining indirect bias, it will be useful to distinguish three classes of characters.
1. Indicator traits. Some characters affect the importance of individuals as models. For example, suppose that naive individuals are more inclined to imitate
successful individuals and that an individual’s success is measured by observing a
particular character—number of cows, number of children, or number of publications. We call this trait the “indicator trait.”

2. Indirectly biased traits. Individuals’ values of the indicator trait may affect their
importance in the cultural transmission of other characters, the indirectly biased
traits. For example, individuals might tend to acquire the clothing styles, pronunciation, and beliefs about the world that characterize the most successful indi-

viduals among potential models.
3. Preference traits. The naive individuals must have some criterion by which to
determine the values of the indicator trait that are preferable. In the case of traits
such as wealth, the criterion probably would be “more is better,” but in other cases
there might be some intermediate value that is admired. For example, contemporary Americans tend to admire people whose families are of intermediate size,
not the childless or the prolific. We will call this trait the “preference trait.”
We will say that transmission is indirectly biased if naive individuals prefer some
models over others based on an indicator trait and use such preferences to determine
the attractiveness of that model for other characters (the indirectly biased traits).
It is easy to see why indirect bias might be adaptive. In Chapter 5, we argued
that it may often be very difficult or costly to evaluate the relative merit of different
cultural variants, especially when they have long-lasting effects. In many cases, a
single trial of a trial-and-error evaluation of the alternative variants may take a
lifetime. One obvious way around this problem is to adopt the variants used by
successful people, as Flinn and Alexander (1982) suggested. It may be difficult to
evaluate the best hunting practices from among the myriad of possibilities, so just
copy the most successful hunter. Since it is difficult to determine exactly which of
his techniques makes him successful, one might imitate everything that is plausibly
connected with his hunting success, from the way he sets his traps to the chant he

244

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

says every day before going off to hunt. Later in this chapter, we will see that this
intuitive argument can be made more precise.
Evidence for Indirect Bias
Evidence from social learning experiments

What we call indirectly biased transmission is related to the Freudian concept of
identification. (See Rancour-Laferriere,

1981, for an extended discussion of the

relationship between identification and imitation.) Freudians believe that children
form strong affective attachments to particular persons, especially their parents,
that lead the child to have a generalized desire to be like those persons. Certain
characteristics in the parents or other models are hypothesized to affect the degree
of identification. Strong identification causes children to acquire cultural traits quite
distinct from the traits giving rise to the original identification.
Since identification has been a controversial subject in psychology, students of
social learning have conducted a number of useful experiments to investigate its
effect on social learning (Yando et al., 1978: 62-65). Unfortunately, most of these
studies have focused on how indicator traits (in our terminology) affect the amount
of attention that is paid to different models, and relatively few studies actually
demonstrated that indicator traits affect the probability that different modeled
variants are actually acquired. It seems reasonable to infer that characteristics of
models that attract attention will also stimulate acquisition (Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978: 251-254). However, because symbols of prestige and other traits
that act as stimuli of affect and attention play so many other roles in social life, the
amount of attention paid to others and the extent of social learning from them may
be poorly correlated. For example, Landy and Segall (1974) showed that essays
supposedly written by attractive women received higher evaluations from males
than those supposedly written by unattractive ones. Males may use female attractiveness as an indicator trait in indirectly biased social learning, but other reasons
for this behavior are easily imagined.
A few studies, however, do suggest that social learning is sometimes characterized by indirect bias, at least in the laboratory. Bandura, Ross, and Ross (1963)

tested three theories of parent-offspring identification in a laboratory setting. Experimental families composed of a preschool or third-grade child and two
“parental” models were constructed. One model mimicked a powerful, controlling
parent, and the other a more passive, consuming parent. Sexes of “parents” and
children were varied independently of the model attributes. The models also displayed a variety of incidental behaviors while playing games with the children. The
test of imitation was the number of these incidental behaviors displayed by the
children. The main effect was a disproportionate modeling of the powerful, controlling parent. The interacting sex variables had some effect, but most treatments
showed a 50-100 percent greater number of imitations of incidental behaviors
modeled by the controlling parent. Many studies have been made of the effect of

nurturant versus nonnurturant models on children’s imitation (Yando et al., 1978:

64-65). For example, Yussen and Levy (1975) exposed preschoolers and third
graders to warm and neutral adult models. Warm models increased attention,
reduced susceptibility to distraction, and enhanced recall of modeled events.

Evidence for Indirect Bias

245

These results are only suggestive. Observers do appear to react to some traits of
others in a way that affects the general attention given to a person and hence the
modeling of traits not involved in attracting attention. However, the data available
from social learning studies are not yet sufficiently extensive to give a general
picture of the phenomenon. The range of indicator characters studied is small, the
potential variation in the responses among naive individuals little studied, and most

studies have treated only transmission from adult to child.

Evidence from the diffusion of innovations
The study of the diffusion of innovations has produced a considerable body of
observational data that suggests that indirect bias is important. Some individuals
play a much greater role in the spread of innovations than do others; those who,
once persuaded to adopt an innovation, are very likely to be imitated by their
fellows are called opinion leaders. Rogers with Shoemaker (1971: Chap. 6) devote
a chapter to reviewing the patterns of information flow during the adoption of an
innovation as a function of the social statuses and other sociological attributes of
earlier and later adopters. The most general effect discovered in the study of the
diffusion of innovations is that opinion leaders are usually of somewhat higher
social status than followers, but that the difference is relatively slight compared to
the total extent of the status hierarchy in the whole social system. Opinion leaders
are usually respectable solid citizens of the community who conform to community
norms but have more contact with the larger world and more social participation
in local affairs. Opinion leaders may or may not have a positive attitude toward
innovation. Some evidence suggests that traditional and modern societies have
different patterns of opinion leadership. Traditional societies seem to have more
general purpose leaders, and the social distance between leaders and followers
seems less, compared to modern or modernizing communities.
Rogers suggests that these patterns of imitation result from the use of a basically
sound choice criterion on the part of potential adopters. On the one hand, the
apparent success of high-status individuals is an indirect indication that they know
valuable techniques that might be profitably adopted. On the other, individuals who
are too different in status are likely to be different in other ways from potential
adopters. For example, they may be large rather than small landowners. He cites
cases of two types of errors that are possible in choices of opinion leaders, depending on the details of the situation. One can choose leaders who are too similar
to oneself in a situation where higher status individuals have adopted traits that
would be useful, or one can imitate those whose techniques are unsuited to one’s
own situation. Choosing an opinion leader drastically different in status is likely to
result in the latter problem. In our terms, an adaptive indirect bias is one in which
there is a strong relationship between the potential model’s indicator character (e.g.
social status) and the utility of the other traits that are to be imitated. It appears that
effective indirect biases of this type are often found to be operating in diffusion-ofinnovation studies.
Rogers with Shoemaker (1971: 221) illustrate the way indicator traits are used
to define opinion leadership with an example from East Pakistan. Village leaders
were enrolled in a training program with the expectation that they would act as

246

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

opinion leaders in the diffusion of agricultural innovations in their home communities. The local followers appeared to use mode of dress as an indicator trait. As
long as village leaders tied their long shirts above their knees when they worked,
they retained their status as opinion leaders and were influential in the diffusion of
the agricultural innovations. When they allowed them to drop below their knees in
imitation of the training program leaders, villagers switched allegiance to new
opinion leaders and the flow of innovations stopped. Rogers hypothesizes that the
followers felt that their former leaders had become too much like the higher-class
teachers.
Evidence from sociolinguistics
Sociolinguists have been able to show that dialect evolution occurs fairly rapidly
(Fishman,

1972;

Labov,

1972).

In typical

speech

communities,

measurable

changes occur over a few decades, and the differences in speech patterns between
older and younger speakers can be used to map their trajectory. The changes are
strongly correlated with sociological variables, especially social class, and intermediate social classes are usually the leading group. In the United States dialects
are evolving rapidly, despite the use of a standardized dialect of English by the
broadcast media. Dialect change is usually initiated in those subgroups within a
larger speech community whose identity as a group is threatened. A distinctive
regional or class dialect thus becomes a symbol of social status and group solidarity.
Labov (1980) illustrates these generalizations with a study from Philadelphia.
Among Philadelphia whites, the immigration of large numbers of rural blacks in
recent decades has stimulated a strenuous reassertion of local rights and privileges
and a parallel development of a local Philadelphia white dialect. The dialect pattern
thus reflects the deep social and political divisions between the city’s ethnic groups.
The leaders of the Philadelphia dialect changes are upper-working-class women.
The speakers who show the most “advanced” sound changes are those with the
highest status in their Jocal community, and with wide-ranging contacts inside and
outside of it. From these centrally located individuals, dialect innovations spread

outward to lower status and eventually to higher status speakers. The importance
of locally relevant prestige as the key trait of effective models is similar to that
found for opinion leaders in the diffusion of technical innovations. In dialect
evolution, however, the innovations themselves originate with this group. The use
of a few opinion leaders as models for dialect transmission, the indirect bias effect,
plus the importance of horizontal transmission in language learning probably account for the speed of dialect evolution.
The evidence that dialect change results from the action of indirect bias is fairly
convincing. Much small-scale linguistic variation, especially dialect, is not consciously recognized by speakers. Labov (1972: 308) reports that speakers of a
distinctive dialect on Martha’s Vineyard are not aware of most of the differences
between their dialect and that of mainlanders. Vineyarders are conscious of using
a certain amount of archaic nautical jargon, but this is only indirectly related to the
phonological aspects of their dialect studied by Labov. This suggests that it is
unlikely that they have deliberately chosen to adopt the advanced forms of the

Models of Indirect Bias

247

dialect. Rather, they appear to have granted a considerable social status to
fishermen who best exemplify a spirit of resistance to the encroachment of higher
status summer visitors. Their admiration of the fishermen’s independent ways and
scornful distaste for the visitors, on whom most islanders are uncomfortably dependent economically, leads to the inadvertent copying of the fishermen’s dialect.
Interestingly enough, those young people who plan to leave the island, and have
Switched their prestige norms to favor mainlanders, show much less of the distinctive Martha’s Vineyard dialect (Labov, 1972: 32).

Models of Indirect Bias
In this section we build a model of indirect bias in two steps:

1. So far we have only considered models in which there was a single culturally
transmitted character. To model indirect bias, it is necessary to keep track of at least
two different culturally transmitted characters, the indicator trait and the indirectly
biased trait. We begin by generalizing the blending model discussed in Chapter 3
to the case of more than one culturally transmitted characters.
2. In Chapter 5 we analyzed a model of direct bias in which there was a single
culturally transmitted quantitative character. It was assumed that an individual’s
phenotypic value for the character affected his attractiveness as model for that
character. Here, we simply add a second quantitative character and assume that the
value of the first character also affects the attractiveness of the individual for the
second character.

Cultural transmission with multiple characters
To model indirect bias we need models of cultural transmission in which individuals are characterized by values of several different cultural traits. In Chapter 3, we
introduced quantitative cultural characters with the example of an individual’s
position along a single left-right political continuum. As we all know, the beliefs
of many people are not easily placed on this continuum. In such cases it is better
to characterize individuals in terms of their positions along several different
dimensions—fiscal conservatism versus fiscal liberalism, morally conservative versus libertarian, pro defense versus anti defense, and so on. Thus the beliefs of

people like the so-called neoliberals (fiscally conservative, pro defense, but libertarian on moral issues) who

do not fit on the usual left to right scale can be

represented.
The existence of interacting multiple traits in the same individual is described
mathematically by supposing that each individual’s cultural repertoire can be characterized by k numbers, X;, . . . ,X,. Each number represents a particular aspect

of an individual’s

cultural repertoire.

For example,

X; might represent the

individual’s attitude toward fiscal issues, X, the individual’s attitude toward defense, and so on. Such an ordered sequence of numbers is called a vector. We

distinguish vectors by printing them in boldface, for example X = (X), . . . ,Xx).
We also assume that an individual’s overt behavior, for example in terms of public
statements, on each of the various issues can also be characterized by a vector of

248

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

values Y = (Y,,... ,¥%). We assume that the relationship between the cultural
variant and the behavior in each dimension is exactly as in the one-dimensional case
(see Chap. 3, pp. 70-71).
The population is thus characterized by the joint distribution of cultural variants.
This distribution tells us what fraction of the population has each combination of
cultural variants. For quantitative characters this distribution takes the mathe-

matical form of a k-dimensional joint probability density function, which we will
label P(X,, . . . ,X;,) or sometimes to save space, P(X). It is easiest to see what this
means in the two-dimensional case. Suppose dX; is a small increment in X;, where
i = 1,2. Then the value of P(X,,X2) dX, dX, approximately gives the probability

that an individual chosen at random from the population has a cultural variant that
lies in the small (dX,,dX.) rectangle as is shown in Figure 8.1. This figure also

illustrates why it is not always possible to simply treat each different trait independently. When the two characters are not independent, evolutionary forces acting on
one character will affect the frequency of the other character. This effect will be
very important in the remainder of this chapter.
It is often possible to choose a scale of measurement for each of the characters
such that the joint distribution of phenotypes in the population has approximately
a multivariate normal distribution. When this is true, it is possible to characterize
the population by (1) the mean value in the population of each character, Xj, (2)
a variance for each character, V,, and (3) the covariance between each pair of

characters, C,. The means and the variances have exactly the same meaning as in
the one-dimensional case. The covariances measure the extent to which the different traits co-occur. If the covariance for a pair of characters is positive, then
individuals with a larger than average value of one trait also tend to have a larger
than average value for the second trait. For example, there probably is some
tendency in the United States for people who are fiscally conservative also to be pro
defense. If we have chosen our scale of measurement so that more conservative
opinions are represented by a larger number (consistent with the usual left to right
representation), then these two characters will have a positive covariance. When
this is true the characters are said to covary.
In the next two sections we will generalize the blending model of cultural
transmission of quantitative characters described in Chapter 3 to the case of two
characters. We will see that the major novelty introduced is the way that transmission affects the covariance between characters in the population.

(PROBABILITY)
RELATIVE
FREQUENCY
Fig. 8.1 Visualization of a two-dimensional joint probability distribution of quantitative characters. The height of each column is proportional to the frequency of individuals
that are
characterized by a narrow range of values of traits X, and X>.

Models of Indirect Bias

249

A bivariate blending model
Let us begin by describing a blending model of the cultural transmission of two
quantitative characters. Suppose that each naive individual is enculturated by n
models. The jth model is characterized by a two-dimensional vector of cultural
variants X; = (Xj;, X2;). The naive individual observes the behavior of each model

and forms an estimate of his or her vector of cultural variants Z; = (Z,;, Z,)). In
analogy with the one-dimensional case, we will assume that
Zi; == Xj; +

C4;

(8.1)
Zp; —— Xj =F ©;

where e;; and ej; are random variables with a bivariate normal distribution,
N; (€1;, €2;), with means equal to zero, variances E,,; and E,;, and a covariance Ey.
This means that, as before, we assume that the naive individual’s estimate of the

jth model’s cultural rule may diverge from his or her actual rule. Since the behavior
that characterizes models will depend on the environment, it is plausible that the
errors in the naive individual’s estimate of the two traits (i.e. e;,; and e,;) in a

particular model will covary. For example, the two traits might be political beliefs
about fiscal policy and about foreign policy. If the model is in an environment that
tends to elicit conservative behavior whatever his beliefs might be, then naive

individuals may overestimate the conservativeness of the model’s actual beliefs for
both characters. We represent this idea mathematically with the assumption that e);
and e; are not necessarily independent. It is plausible that the performances of
different parents will also covary. However, for simplicity we will assume that the
errors made in estimating one model’s rule are independent of the errors made in
estimating the rule of some other model.
We will suppose that each character is transmitted according to the blending rule
used in Chapter 3. Suppose that a naive individual has been exposed to a set of
models and formed the following estimates of their cultural variants Z;, .. . , Zp.

Then the naive individual’s cultural variants for each of the two characters
(Xx 10> X19) will be

X10 =

> Ajj Li;

j=l

(8.2)

Xo = SS Ax Za;
iat

Because we have assumed that Aj; does not necessarily equal A,j, a particular model
may have a different weight in the transmission of character 1 than in the transmission of character 2. This is meant to reflect the notion that individuals occupying
different social roles may be more or less important in the transmission of different
traits.
As usual we want to determine how transmission changes the distribution of
cultural variants in the population. This means we need to determine the effect of
transmission on the mean value and the variance of each character, and on the

250

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

ity that a
covariance between the characters. Let M(Xi, . . . , Xn) be the probabil

ce » Xn)
set of models with the combination of vectors of cultural variants (Xi,
given
is formed. Then the mean value of the character X; after transmission, Xj, is

by
xX; =

N, (ein; eon)M(X1,

|> oO < [™ (e1, €>1) goes

rh OS

Xn)

(8.3)
5

Aj(Xijt+ ei) dX,

a oe 0 dX, de;;

oo

9 der,

HI
es 1

where i = 1, 2. This equation is very similar to Equation 3.22, the expression for

the mean after transmission in the one-dimensional case. If the formation of sets of
models is nonselective, derivations virtually identical to the one given in Box 322,

yield

ed ea Se

(8.4)

and a similar derivation yields the following expressions for the variances after
transmission:

Vi = > Aj, (VitE)

(8.5)

j=l

where i =

1 or 2 anal

=

n

2

j=l Ay Ei

n

2

j=1 igh

E, and E, are weighted averages of the errors introduced in the imitation of each

class of model. Equations 8.4 and 8.5 are equivalent to the expressions for transmission of one character given in Chapter 3. Thus, adding a second character does
not alter the effect of blending inheritance on the means or variances of the
characters transmitted.
However, to completely specify the distribution of cultural variants in the population after transmission we need to determine the effect of transmission on the
covariance between the characters. The covariance between any two random variables u and v is defined as E(uv) — E(u)E(v) where E(-) denotes the expectation.

In the present case, we want to compute covariance between the values of trait 1
and trait 2 after transmission, Cj), given the distribution of cultural variants before
transmission. It can be shown that

Cp, = (R/t.) (Cy + Ey)

(8.6)

Models of Indirect Bias

251

where

=b=
12

ty AgiNee As: Bio;
yal
ee
PSeAN
Ay Ag
ASA

(8.7)

and
x

n

its, =

5

n

A

=i)

Aj > a3)
j=1

j=l

and

R

SAG

tae

As

(SP, AR DE, AW?

(8.8)

Equation 8.6 says that the effect of blending inheritance on the covariance
between two characters is similar in some ways to its effect on the variance. The

covariance is increased each generation by the new covariation that is introduced
by correlated errors, measured by Ej. It is decreased each generation by an amount
that is proportional to 1/n,, the geometric mean of the effective numbers of models
for each trait. This is the same blending effect that reduces the variances. However,
unlike the effects of blending inheritance on the variance, the reduction in the

covariance also depends on the parameter R. This parameter, which has the form
of a correlation coefficient, measures the extent to which the sets of models are the

same for the two traits. To see this consider two extreme cases:

1. Aj, = A). This means that each of the models has exactly the same importance in the transmission of both traits. Then R = 1, n. = n,, and blending

inheritance has the effect of reducing the variances of each of the characters and the
covariance between them by the same factor, 1 /n,.
2. Aj; > 0 implies Aj; = 0, and Aj; > 0 implies Aj; = 0. This means that the

sets of models for the two characters do not overlap. One set of individuals serve
as models for trait 1 and a different set for trait 2. In this case R = O, and any
covariance that existed in the population before transmission is completely eradicated by the transmission process.

The effect of blending inheritance on the covariance between characters depends
on the extent to which the sets of models for the two traits are composed of the same
individuals. As the sets of models transmitting two traits become different, transmission exerts a force reducing the covariance between characters even more
strongly than it does the variances. As we will see, this is important because it is
the ratio of the covariance to the variance that determines the strength of indirect
bias.

252

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

We have also generalized the multifactor model presented in Chapter 3 to allow
for multiple characters. This model is of interest for two reasons. First, the amount
of overlap in the set of models has the same qualitative effect on the covariance
between characters in the multifactorial model as in the blending model, which
suggests that this result is robust. Second, this model also allows for another
mechanism that can act to preserve the covariance between characters. Recall that
in Chapter 3 we imagined that each observable behavioral character was based on
a number of culturally transmitted factors. In the context of a two-character model,
this means that there can be a significant covariance between two characters even
if there is no covariance between the underlying factors as long as at least one factor
influences both characters. This makes sense intuitively. For example, people who
believe in the perfectibility of man may have liberal attitudes about many issues,
while those who believe that men are irremediably troublesome may tend to hold
conservative views.
The effects of indirect bias on the mean phenotype

In this section we combine the model of cultural transmission of two characters with
the model of directly biased transmission introduced in Chapter 5 to determine the
effect of indirect bias on the joint distribution of the two traits in the population.
First, assume that each naive individual is exposed to n models. The importance
of the jth model for the ith trait is given by a constant linear weight labeled Aj. In
Chapter 5, direct bias was modeled by allowing an individual’s cultural variant to
affect its linear weight. Suppose that trait 1 is the indicator trait and trait 2 is an
indirectly biased trait. Then, according to our definition of indirect bias, the im-

portance of the jth model for the indirectly biased trait depends on the variant of
the indicator trait that characterizes the jth model. We will say that the variants of
the indicator trait that make an individual most likely to be imitated are the
“admired” variants. Consideration of why indirect bias might be adaptive, and even
superior to direct bias, is explored in the next section.
Consider a particular naive individual exposed to n models. To make the equations easier to follow, we modify the notation used in the last section. We denote
the value of the indicator trait of the jth model as Xj; and the value of the indirectly
biased trait of the jth model as Xp,. The naive individual’s estimates of the jth
model’s indicator trait and indirectly biased trait are Z;, and Zp;, respectively. Then,

according to the blending model, the naive individual’s cultural variants for the
indicator trait, Xjo, and the indirectly biased trait, Xpo, are

Xio = YAyZy

(8.9)

j=1

and

j=l

where Aj and Ap; are the importances of the jth model in the transmission of the

Models of Indirect Bias

253

indicator and indirectly biased traits. We assume that the transmission of the
indicator trait is subject to direct bias exactly as in Chapter 5. This means that the
weight of the jth model is a function of his or her variant of the indicator trait, that

is,

NG

tg

—

ay(1 zc B(Z;;))

Oa ease

B(Zix))

(8.11)

Equation 8.11 says that the importance of the jth model in the transmission of the
indicator trait is given by a basic weight, o,, that depends on the jth model’s social
role and a modifying term that depends on his cultural variant.
To represent indirect bias we assume that the weight of the jth-model for the
indirectly biased trait, Apj, is a similar function of his indicator trait Z,,, that is,
Ne

ap(1 + O(Z;))
~ SL, op(1 + O(Zn))

oe

Equation 8.12 says that the importance of the jth model in the transmission of the
indirectly biased trait also depends on a basic weight. We write this ap, to emphasize that the basic weight of the jth model may be different for the two traits.
However, ap; is modified by function O(Z;;), the indirect bias function, which gives
the effect of the indicator trait’s value on the weight of a model in the transmission
of the indirectly biased trait. We will assume that the form of the indirect bias
function, 6(- ), is generally similar to that of the direct bias function, B(- ), but that

the strengths of the two processes may be different. The value of the indicator trait
that maximizes O( - ) is the most admired variant of the indicator trait, and individ-

uals with this value will, on average, have the greatest weight in the transmission
of the indirectly biased trait.
We want to determine how transmission affects the mean values of the two
characters in the population. Once again assume that (1) sets of models are formed
at random and (2) the effect of bias in any single generation is small. The transmission rule for the indicator trait is directly biased, and thus from Equation 5.10
the mean of the indicator trait in the population after transmission, X;, is equal to

Xi=X,+(1- S\a3)Cov(Z1,B(Zy)

(8.13)

fa

where

1/Zaj is the effective number of models for the indicator trait and

Cov(Z;,B(Z)) is the covariance of the indicator trait and the bias function. The

covariance is a measure of the strength of directly biased transmission.
An exactly parallel derivation shows that the mean of the indirectly biased trait
after transmission is given by

XNipexp +

— S\a3)Cov(Zp,0(Z,))
leet

(8.14)

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

254

Notice that the strength of indirect bias depends on the covariance of the value of
the indirectly biased trait Zp and on the value of the indirect bias function O(Z),

which is a function of the indicator trait. Thus variants of the indirectly biased trait
that are positively correlated with the admired variants of the indicator trait will
increase in frequency.
We can understand better what this means by rewriting the covariance term in
the following form:
1/2

Cov(Zp,O(Z))

=

Com(Zs.2)(

Var(Zp)
Varoe) Cov(Z;,0(Z;))

Ae,
(8.15)

This way of writing Equation 8.14 emphasizes the fact that the strength of indirect
bias depends on the extent to which the indicator trait and the indirectly biased traits
are correlated. If the correlation is increased, then, all other things equal, the force

of indirect bias will also be increased. Equation 8.15 also indicates that the strength
of indirect bias depends on the amount of variation that exists for the indirectly
biased trait. In this way, indirect bias is similar to direct bias and natural selection.
It is also clear from Equation 8.15 that even if B(-) = O(-), the strength of

indirect bias can be greater than the force of direct bias as long as
F

|Corr(Z,,Zp)| > (varcZy/Var2))

1/2

(8.16)

This means that indirect bias can be stronger than direct bias based on the same
criterion if the amount of variation in the indirectly biased trait is sufficiently greater
than that of the directly biased trait to compensate for the less than perfect correlation between the two. For example, in a poor village the variation in wealth
displayed might be very small, but the correlated variation in some useful skill
might be quite large. Indirect bias using wealth displayed might cause a substantial
increase in skills, while the change in the indicator due to direct bias might be quite
small.

Forces affecting the covariance between characters
The correlation between the indicator trait and the indirectly biased trait affects the
strength of indirect bias. To fully understand indirect bias, we must understand the
forces that affect the covariance between the two characters. We have been able to
think of four kinds of forces that affect the covariance:

1. We have already seen that transmission itself affects the covariance. Nonoverlapping sets of models for the two traits act to reduce the covariance, while
covarying estimation errors act to increase it.
2. We have also argued that in the multifactorial model of the transmission of
more

than one character,

the existence of factors which

affect more

than one

character act to preserve covariation.
3. Natural selection can affect the covariance between characters when the two
characters interact to determine fitness.

Models of Indirect Bias

255

4. Indirectly biased transmission itself can increase the covariance between the
indicator trait and the indirectly biased trait. This effect is especially pronounced
when the preference trait is also an indirectly biased trait.
In order to consider the effects of natural selection on the covariance between
two culturally transmitted characters, the model of natural selection used in Chapter
4 must be generalized to allow for more than two characters. To do this we assume
that an individual’s cultural fitness is a function of both of its cultural variants,
W(X;,Xp). This function gives the probability that an individual with the combination of cultural variants X; and Xp becomes a model. Then the joint distribution of
cultural variants after transmission, P’(X;,Xp), is given by

P’(Xj,Xp) =

P(X1,Xp)W
(Xi, Xp)
SfP(X1,Xp)W(X1,Xp)dXidXp

(Se 1g)

We assume that the distribution of cultural variants before selection is bivariate
normal. To evaluate the distribution of cultural variants after selection we must
choose a fitness function.
One plausible way to generalize the one-dimensional model of selection used in
Chapter 4 is to assume that W(-) has a bivariate Gaussian form, as pictured in

Figure 8.2a. In this example individuals whose vector of cultural variants departs
from the optimum vector of cultural variants (H;,Hp) are less likely to become

models. Notice that individuals who deviate from the optimum by having values of
X; and Xp that are either both too large or both too small suffer a much smaller

decline in fitness than individuals who have one large value and one small value.
In this example, the two characters interact in their effects on fitness. The fitness

Xp

POSITIVE INTERACTION
XI

Xp

NEGATIVE INTERACTION
XI

Xp

NO INTERACTION

XI
as contours of fitness on a plane whose dimensions
functions
Fig. 8.2 Bivariate Gaussian fitness
are values of traits X, and X2.

256

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

function shown in Figure 8.2b illustrates the opposite kinds of interaction between
the traits; now individuals with a large value of X; and a small value of Xp are

favored relative to individuals with small or large values for both traits. Figure 8.2c
shows an example of a fitness function in which there is no interaction between the
two traits.
Positive interactions between traits are believed to be common in genetic evolution because of allometric relationships. For example, animals with forelegs and
hind legs that are both too short may be better off than others who have forelegs
that are too long and hind legs that are too short. It seems likely that analogous
phenomena exist in the case of many culturally transmitted characters. To take a
complex example, social acceptance is often thought to be contingent on matching
display traits with skills. Lawyers who talk and dress like farmers are likely to be
thought of and treated as oddities by their fellows. Even in academia, where
standards of dress are quite relaxed, an ecologist who regularly wore a three-piece
suit would excite quizzical comment (we have never met one), whereas an economist who did the same (and many do) would not attract any notice. To the extent
that violating such expectations causes unfavorable judgments about people, selection (and perhaps biased cultural transmission) will act to increase covariation.
When two characters have interactive effects on fitness, natural selection will
create a force that affects the correlation between the characters. This is most easily

proved if it is assumed that the fitness function is a bivariate Gaussian function.
Unfortunately, it is cumbersome to analyze even this simple case without using
matrix notation. The interested reader can find complete analyses in Lande (1979)
and Karlin (1979). These authors conclude that the equilibrium distribution of the
two variants in the population is a compromise between two forces. Selection tends
to cause the population to conform to the shape of the fitness function, while
random variation tends to cause the distribution to conform to the probability
distribution of the random errors. Thus natural selection tends to cause variants that
interact positively to be positively correlated. The strength of this effect will depend
on the relative strength of selection and random variation.
The correlation between fitness and other characters

So far we have only considered correlation between ordinary culturally transmitted
characters. When we investigate the adaptive consequences of indirect bias, it will
also be of interest to know whether the regression of fitness itself on a character that
affects fitness can be nonzero at equilibrium. The change in the mean value of a
character due to natural selection, AX, is given by

AX = Var(X)Reg(W(X),X)

(8.18)

If we assume that random variation maintains a finite variance in the character and
that there are no other directional forces acting on a population, then the mean will
come to equilibrium only when the regression of an individual’s fitness on his
cultural variant is zero. This makes sense; if some variants have higher fitness on
average, selection should increase their frequency.
However, if the equilibrium results from a balance of selection and other forces,

Models of Indirect Bias

257

then the regression of fitness on a character can be nonzero.
For example, in a
spatially varying environment the mean phenotype at equilibrium
will be determined by a balance between the forces of selection and migration.
To see how this
affects the covariance between a character and fitness, consider the
following very
simple model of the evolution of a quantitative character in a spatiall
y varying
habitat. Suppose a large metapopulation is composed of a large number
of subpopulations living in different habitats. There is a single quantitative characte
r
which is transmitted according to a linear transmission rule. In each subpopu
lation
this character is subjected to stabilizing natural selection. Now consider a single
subpopulation in which the optimal value of the character is H and the width of the
fitness function is S. After selection, a fraction, m, of the subpopulation emigrat
es
and is replaced by immigrants from the metapopulation. We assume that the local
population is small enough relative to the metapopulation that we can neglect the
effects of the local population on the metapopulation. For simplicity, we assume
that the mean cultural variant in the metapopulation, and thus among the immigrants, is zero. With these assumptions it can be shown that the equilibrium mean
of the character among models in the local population, X, is approximately

VH
ee
mS
+ V

(8.19)

where V is the equilibrium variance of the character. When migration is weak
compared to selection, the equilibrium mean is near H. When selection is weak
compared to migration, it is near zero, the metapopulation mean. At the equilibrium
described by 8.19 there will be a positive regression of fitness individuals on the
values of their cultural variants. When selection and migration are both weak, it can
be shown that this has the following simple form:

Reg(W(X),X) = (H — X)/S

(8.20)

Equation 8.20 says that regression of fitness on a character is proportional to the
mean character’s distance from the equilibrium.

The adaptive consequences of indirect bias
In Chapter 5, we argued that only direct biases that are adaptive in a wide variety
of habitats are likely to evolve. For some characters, the same variants may be

adaptive in many different habitats, and a simple invariant bias may be favored. For
other characters, quite different variants may be favored in different habitats. If it
is not too difficult for each individual to try each variant and evaluate it according
to some generally applicable criteria of satisfaction, then the evolution of a general
purpose direct bias is plausible. However, for many characters, it may be very
difficult to evaluate the merit of different variants. For the most basic beliefs and
values each trial might occupy a lifetime.
Rather than attempt to determine which variants of each trait lead to success, an

alternative approach is to simply imitate the successful, as suggested by Flinn and
Alexander (1982). If adopting a particular variant causes individuals to have higher

258

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

fitness than the average individual, then it follows that the adaptive variant should

occur in higher frequency among individuals with high fitness. Thus it seems
plausible that the strategy of imitating the successful, a form of indirect bias, might
provide an alternative to direct bias, one that increases an individual’s chances of
acquiring locally adaptive cultural variants, is applicable in a wide variety of
environments, and does not require costly evaluation of the different variants.
The results that have been derived so far in this chapter can be used to make this
argument in more detail. Consider the model of a population in the spatially
variable habitat discussed in the previous section, supposing that there are two
quantitative traits. The indicator trait is a proxy for fitness. It could be any trait
which has a high, positive correlation with genetic fitness in most of the habitats.
Number of offspring, wealth, and political power are likely candidates, at least in
nonindustrial

societies.

For example,

Irons (1979b)

showed

that a number

of

economic and political traits connoting high prestige were correlated with fitness
among the Turkoman. The indirectly biased trait is an ordinary culturally transmitted character; the optimum value of the indirectly biased trait is different in
different habitats. As before, consider evolution in one of the habitats in which the

optimum value of the indirectly biased trait is H. From the previous section, we
know that at equilibrium the regression of fitness on the indirectly biased trait has
the value given in Equation 8.20.
Now suppose there are a few rare naive individuals who tend to choose models
with large values of the indicator trait according to the indirectly biased transmission rule outlined above. If the indicator trait is highly correlated with fitness
and the distribution of the indicator and indirectly biased traits is approximately
bivariate normal, then according to Equation 8.14 the mean value of Xp among
these naive individuals will be

Xp = Xp + (1 — Sah) Cov(Z;,O(Z)) x (H — Xp)/S

(8.21)

il

strength of bias

strength of selection

Equation 8.21 shows that on average the mean phenotype of naive individuals who
utilize indirect bias will be closer to the optimal phenotype than will that of naive
individuals who utilize a linear, unbiased rule. The strength of indirect bias is
proportional to the product of the strength of the bias and the strength of selection.
Moreover, we have made no assumptions about the value of H; the same simple

decision rule will increase the probability that naive individuals adopt favored
variants in every habitat.
Given that there are easily observable characters that are correlated with fitness
in a wide variety of habitats, it seems, to us at least, that indirect bias provides a
good general purpose cultural acquisition rule. It should generally require less
effort to apply than direct bias. Essentially, with indirect bias the individual uses
the lives of others as experiments to evaluate different cultural variants. Because
of this, indirect bias may be much cheaper than direct bias, particularly for traits
which may have multiple effects over an individual’s lifetime. It also means that
indirect bias will increase the probability of acquiring a favored cultural variant
in
many different environments. If there are no characters which are strongly
cor-

The Runaway Process

259

related with fitness in most habitats, then all these conclusions are suspect. We

consider some aspects of this issue in the next section.

The Runaway Process
Thus far we have assumed that every individual in the population admires the same
variant of the indicator trait—that is, the cultural transmission rule of every individual is governed by the same indirect bias function. This means that the criteria of
indirect bias cannot evolve. They cannot be affected by selection, direct bias, or

guided variation. If there are truly characters which are positively correlated with
fitness in the entire range of habitats that characterize the human species, this would
not be too important. However, it seems to us that few such characters are likely
to exist. Biologists have found it very difficult to measure the fitness of noncultural
animals in the field, and it is probably at least as difficult to assay fitness in the
human case. The relationship between numbers of offspring and fitness is often
quite ambiguous, since offspring must survive and reproduce themselves to count.
Wealth and power are problematic because different characters may denote wealth
and power in different societies, and because wealth and power are not necessarily
correlated with fitness. The relationship between prestige and fitness is even more
ambiguous; indicators of prestige are often almost incomprehensible to those not
raised in a particular culture. If indirect bias is to provide a means of acquiring
adaptive behaviors in a variety of environments, the criteria that determine what is
admired probably will be transmitted culturally and will respond to the forces of
cultural evolution.
In this section, we generalize the model of indirect bias so that the criteria that
determine which variants of the indicator trait are admired are allowed to vary. We
will see that under some circumstances these criteria will evolve so that indirect bias
increases the frequency of genetically adaptive variants. However, we will also see
that an unstable runaway process, analogous to runaway sexual selection in ordinary genetic evolution, is possible. This process can cause the indicator trait to
coevolve with the preference trait so as to cause the indicator trait to become
extremely exaggerated. In a later section we review data that suggest that humans
frequently engage in exaggerated, maladaptive displays of prestige, and that this
behavior is understandable in terms of indirect bias.
To get an intuitive understanding of why indirect bias can lead to an unstable
runaway process, it is helpful to review R. A. Fisher’s (1958) explanation for the
evolution of exaggerated male characters, such as the tails of peacocks and birds
of paradise. Imagine a species in which females choose males for their mates based
on a sex-limited morphological character, the size of their tails. Further, suppose
that females, on average, prefer males with tails that are too large. That is, males

with smaller tails would be more likely to survive than males with the tails that most

females prefer. Never mind, for the moment, why females make such odd choices.

There are two competing selective forces acting on male tail size: sexual selection
due to female choice acts to increase the frequency of males with large tails, and
ordinary viability selection acts to increase the frequency of males with small tails.
In polygynous species, in which a small proportion of males are responsible for a

260

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

large proportion of matings, sexual selection can be much stronger than viability
selection. When this is the case, males with large tails will be favored and tail size
will increase. Fisher’s insight was to see that under some conditions, the same
process of sexual selection that increased the frequency of males with large tails
could also increase the frequency of females who preferred large tails. Females who
mate with males who have large tails will tend to have sons who also have large
tails, and will tend to transmit a preference for large tails to their daughters and their
sons’ daughters. In other words, female choice will cause the preference for large
tails and large tails themselves to become correlated. If the net effect of individual
and sexual selection is to favor large tails, selection will also lead to a correlated

response in female preferences. Put anthropomorphically, selection may favor
females who prefer males who will produce “sexy” sons. As has been recently
shown by Lande (1981) and Kirkpatrick (1982), under the right conditions this can
lead to a self-reinforcing process in which both tail size and the tail size most
preferred by females increase indefinitely.
A closely analogous process can cause a cultural runaway process when transmission is indirectly biased. Rather than females choosing mates based on a male
character, the cultural process is driven by naive individuals choosing models based
on the value of the indicator trait. Again consider a hypothetical example in which
individuals choose models based on the value of a character marking prestige, for
example, their style of dress. Further suppose that for still unspecified reasons the
majority of the population admire a colorful but otherwise maladaptive mode of
dress. Individuals who dress practically are better protected from the weather and
spend less on clothes, but are less admired and therefore less likely to be imitated.
In other words, we assume that natural selection acting on cultural variation favors
practical dress and indirect bias favors colorful dress. It is easy to see in this case
how the net effect of these two forces could act to increase the frequency of colorful
dressers. It is somewhat less obvious that indirect bias can increase the frequency
of individuals who admire and tend to imitate colorful dresse.s. Individuals who
admire colorful dress will tend to acquire colorful dress. If individuals tend to
acquire their beliefs about what styles of dress make a person admirable and their
own style of dress from the same individuals, then forces that increase the frequency of colorful dress will also act to increase the frequency of individuals who
tend to imitate colorfully dressed people. It is as if people choose models from
whom they will acquire traits that will subsequently make them more likely to be
imitated.

A model with variable biases

To model the evolution of the criteria which determine the strength and direction
of indirect bias, we assume that there is a culturally transmitted quantitative character, the preference trait, that affects which variants of the indicator trait an
individual finds attractive. Two naive individuals exposed to the same set of models
but characterized by different values of the preference trait will, on average, adopt
different cultural variants of other traits affected by indirect bias. Using the term

The Runaway Process

261

“preference trait’ does not imply that the naive individuals necessarily make conscious choices, only that they tend disproportionately to imitate models with some
variants of the indicator trait. To allow for the possibility that the preference trait
will be affected by the force of indirect bias, it is necessary to consider the
simultaneous evolution of an indicator character. In the most interesting cases of
indirect bias, there will also be a number of indirectly biased traits whose evolution
was also affected by the same indicator and preference traits. However, to keep the
model manageable we will treat only the evolution of an indicator and a preference
trait. We do not believe that adding more indirectly biased traits will have important
qualitative effects on the results of the model.
Real situations undoubtedly are more complex. For example, consider dialect
evolution on Martha’s Vineyard, studied by Labov (1972). An example of an
indicator trait is the extent to which an individual uses nautical jargon in everyday
speech. The use of a rich, “salty” vocabulary is thought by Vineyarders to be a
marker of status as an old stock Vineyarder. A preference trait is the extent to which
an individual desires to imitate other individuals who exemplify the rugged independence of the old Islanders.

In addition to these two traits, the evolving trait

complex on Martha’s Vineyard includes phonological aspects of their dialect and
a number of other traits related to social organization, status, and group identity.
Some of the traits in this complex, for example, dialect phonology, may indicate
status as an old stock Islander. Although dialect phonology is not easy for people
to perceive consciously, people do seem to form judgments of others based on this
character (Labov,

1972: Chap. 6). It also seems likely the evolution of dialect is

embedded in a large system of indirect bias involving many other traits. The
two-trait model presented here is an attempt to obtain a qualitative glimpse into the
dynamics of systems like this one in which there are many traits that indicate status
and many others that are affected through their correlation with the indicator traits.
Assume that individuals undergo the following life cycle. First, naive individuals acquire values of both the indicator trait and the preference trait vertically
according to an unbiased transmission rule. This is followed by an episode of
oblique transmission which is affected by both direct and indirect bias according to
the model described in the last section, in which the preference trait is also the
indirectly biased trait. Cultural transmission is followed by an episode of natural
selection in which an individual’s fitness is determined by the value of his indicator
trait. We will assume that the preference trait has no direct effect on the cultural
or genetic fitness of an individual; its only effects on fitness are through its effects
on cultural transmission.
If the joint distribution of cultural variants is approximately bivariate normal, we
only need to keep track of the means and variances of each of the characters and
their covariance. It turns out that, given the assumptions of the model, the variances
and the covariances reach a stable equilibrium independent of the values of the
means. To derive recursions for the mean values of the two traits we assume (1)
that the variances are at equilibrium at values V, and Vp and the covariance is also
at an equilibrium value C, and (2) that the forces of biased transmission and

selection are weak enough that we can regard these values as approximately constant during a single generation.

262

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

Recursions for the means

In order to derive recursions for the mean values of the indicator and preference
traits in the population, we begin with the effects of oblique transmission. Let X;
and Xp be the means of the indicator and the preference traits in the population just
before oblique transmission. Each naive individual is exposed to n models. Consider a particular naive individual, Peter, who is characterized by the preference
trait value, Xpp. We assume that Peter’s value of the indicator trait after oblique
transmission, Xjo, is given by the following blending rule:
Si

a1

Sy eae

35 BiZn.Xn)}

ee

a sa(1 ar BZ.

where Zy,, is Peter’s estimate

(8.22)

Xn)

of the value of indicator trait of the kth model

computed exactly as above. Equation 8.22 is the same transmission rule discussed
in the last section, except that now the shape of the bias function depends on the
value of the preference trait in the naive individual, Xpp. We assume that each
individual also modifies his or her preference trait during oblique transmission.
Then Peter’s value of the preference trait after oblique transmission is given by

Se Zee

1* OZa.Xn))}

Xpo =

(8.23)
it

cn (
1 = OZa.Xn))

where Zp, is Peter’s estimate of the preference trait of the kth model.
Based on the results derived above, we know that if sets of models are formed
at random, then the mean of the indicator trait after transmission is

Xi=X%i+a- Sai)Cov( 2,82. Xn)

(8.24)

I=1

and the mean value of the preference trait after oblique transmission is given by the
analogous expression

Xi=X>+

Chis S\as) Cov(Zp. 012s.Xm)

(8.25)

1=1

To evaluate the covariance terms we need to assume some particular functional
form for the direct and indirect bias functions. We will assume that the direct bias
function has the form

te
ee
2
B(Zi,Xpo) = b exp eae)

(8.26)

The Runaway Process

263

and that the indirect bias function has the similar form

a)
O(Zi,,Xpo) = u exp (S

(8.27)

20

These functions have the same Gaussian form as the bias function that was introduced in Chapter 5. Now, however, the value of the preference trait in the naive
individual (Xpo) determines which value of the indicator trait maximizes the weight

of a model in oblique transmission of both the traits. Notice that the intensity of the

direct bias acting on the indicator trait, measured

by 1/B, may differ from the

intensity of indirect bias acting on the preference trait, measured by 1/0.

It can be shown that if bias is weak (i.e. B,@ > V;,C) the means after transmission are
x} = X; a VB'(Xp

er

oe

Xp

=

=

é:

Xp +

C6'(Xp

X)

=
7

(8.28)

Xy)

where

B’ =

— S\«2)(b/B)
niet!

and

6 = (1 — S.a)(u/8)
j=

The parameter B’ measures the effective intensity of biased transmission acting on
the indicator trait and 8’ measures the effective intensity of indirect bias acting on
the preference trait. The variances and covariances refer to the population of models
who participate in oblique transmission.
To model the effects of selection we assume that the probability that an individual characterized by the cultural variant X; becomes a model, W(Xj), is given by
Gaussian fitness function

slcem eye
2S

(8.29)

W(X)) = exp(

It can be shown with a derivation similar to that in Box 4.5 that if selection is weak
(i.e. S > V) the mean values of the two traits in the population after selection are

X! = X, + V[B’(X — X) + (1/S)(H — XD]
~

Xe

Xp

=

nad

Clo'(Xp — Xp)

_

(8.30)

(1/S)(H — X))I

Since unbiased transmission does not affect the mean of either character, these
recursions also give the means of the two characters during the next generation.

264

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

Mathematical properties of the recursions
These recursions have very interesting properties that may explain the evolution of
some human behaviors that are puzzling from a sociobiological point of view. Let

us begin by determining the equilibrium values of the mean value of each of the two

characters in the population. By setting Xp = Xp and X;} = X;, we can see that the
population will be in equilibrium if the following conditions are satisfied:

0 = (1/S)(1/B’ — 1/6’)(H — XD)

(8.31)

Xp = X, + (1/S)(1/B’)(H — XD

(8.32)

The right-hand side of Equation 8.31 is the product of three terms. The equation
will be satisfied whenever any one of these terms is zero. One of three qualitatively
different kinds of equilibrium outcomes will result depending on which of these
terms is zero. We first outline the mathematical properties of each of the three kinds
of equilibria and then provide a qualitative interpretation of all three.
First, let us consider the case (1/S) = 0, which means that there is no selection.

The only forces acting on the population are direct and indirect bias. If we set
(1/S) = 0 in Equation 8.30 or 8.32, it is easy to see that the system will be in
any time that the mean values of the trait are equal. Thus any point
equilibrium
on the line X; = Xp is an equilibrium. It can be shown that this line of equilibria
will be stable whenever

B'V, > 6'C

(8.33)

Equation 8.33 says that the line of equilibria is stable whenever the strength of
directly biased transmission acting on the indicator trait is stronger than the force
of indirect bias on the preference trait. To see why this is so, consider Figure 8.3.
The equilibria lie on the 45-degree line that goes through the origin. Consider
a population that has an initial distribution of cultural variants so that Xp > X,.
Such a population is characterized as a point lying above the line. This means that
the average individual prefers variants of the indicator trait that are larger than the
average value of the indicator trait in the population so the mean value of the
indicator trait increases. However, the effect of indirect bias also causes the value
of the preference trait to increase because the correlation of preference traits and
indicator traits causes imitators of admired models to acquire even more extreme
preferences than they had before. If the indirect effect is larger than the direct
effect, then the mean of the preference trait is increasing faster than the mean of
the indicator trait and both traits “run away.” If the indirect effect is weaker, then

they eventually come to rest at some point along the line of equilibria. However,
all points along the line are neutrally stable with respect to each other. Thus, when
populations are finite, random sampling error will cause the population to “drift
away.”
Let us consider dialect evolution on Martha’s Vineyard in the context of this
model. While the real situation is undoubtedly too complex to be represented

exactly by this simple model, this exercise will help make the results of the model
more concrete, and perhaps give some insight into the nature of the dynamic

The Runaway Process

265

t=3—3

Fig. 8.3 Illustrates the case of unstable indirect bias with a line of equilibria. A one-generation
step of the system is shown in detail. Under the condition given in the text, the increase ofthe
preference trait in the population (AXp) is greater than the increase in the indicator trait (AX;)).
As shown, this causes the distance the population means are away from the unstable equilibrium
line to increase from one generation to the next (Kp — Xr = Xp — Xj). Because

the per-

generation changes are proportional to the difference by which mean preferences exceed mean
values of the indicator trait, as illustrated,

the system will run away

from the line at an

accelerating rate once displaced.

processes which govern dialect evolution. Let us suppose again that the extent to
which individuals use salty talk is the indicator trait and the extent to which
individuals admire salty talk is the preference trait. The point above the line in
Figure 8.3 represents a situation in which the average teenage Vineyarder prefers
more salty talk in his or her models than the average adult Vineyarder actually
speaks. Thus teenage Vineyarders will tend to imitate models whose dialect is more
“salty” than the general population, and the average Vineyarder in the next cultural
generation will use more salty talk. It seems reasonable that the teenage imitators
will tend to acquire their preferences regarding the most admirable amount of salty
talk from the same models from whom they acquired their dialect. If individuals
who use a lot of salty talk also admire salty talk, the amount of salty talk preferred
by the average individual will also increase due to the effect of indirect bias. If this
effect is stronger than the direct effect on the amount of salty talk, the average
amount of salty talk and the preference for salty talk will run away. We believe that

266

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

if another trait like phonological dialect were added to this model, it would be
carried away as well.
Next, let us consider the case (1/B’ — 1/6’) = 0. This means that the relative
strengths of directly biased transmission on the indicator trait and indirectly biased
transmission on the preference trait depend only on V; and C. In this case there is
also a line of equilibria, but now it is defined by the equation
Xp = lee (1/(B'S)) 1X, + [1/(6'S)]H

(8.34)

At any point along this line the forces of bias and selection exactly balance each
other. The line is stable whenever the forces of selection and direct bias that act on
the indicator trait are greater than the force of indirect bias that acts on the preference trait or

a'C < VB’ + 1/S)
If this condition is not satisfied, the mean

(8.35)

value of both traits will increase or

decrease indefinitely depending on the initial state of the population. Still more
interesting, even if the condition is satisfied and despite the fact that natural
selection is acting on the preference trait, the population is free to drift along the
line of equilibrium. The reason for this is that any amount of selection can be
balanced by the appropriate amount of indirect bias. In the case of language
evolution, a group might evolve a new dialect even though the more extreme
speakers faced substantial selective penalties, perhaps because they were unable to
communicate with a larger parent group.
Finally, consider the case X; = H. This means

that the mean

value of the

indicator trait is the value with the highest fitness. From Equation 8.32 we know
that the mean of the preference trait must also be equal to H. Thus, unless there is
no selection (1/S = 0) or the intensities of direct and indirect bias are equal
(B’ = 0’), selection will cause cultural transmission to be biased in favor of the
cultural variant that maximizes cultural fitness. However, it can be shown that this
equilibrium is unstable if Condition 8.35 is violated.
Condition 8.35 says that the fitness-maximizing equilibrium is unstable if the
strength of selection and direct bias on the indicator trait together are less than the
strength of indirect bias on the preference trait. When the equilibrium is stable the
indicator trait may converge to the optimum from any initial condition, and at this
equilibrium, the average individual finds individuals with the optimum value of the
indicator trait most attractive. If Condition 8.35 is not satisfied, however, the mean

values of both traits will not remain at the optimum even if they begin there. Instead
they will “run away” indefinitely toward larger or smaller values.

A qualitative interpretation of the results

The preceding analysis suggests that the evolution of the criteria determining
indirect bias has three qualitatively distinct modes:

I, Stable fitness maximization. If the strength of indirect bias acting on the
preference character is weak compared to the combined forces of selection and

The Runaway Process

267

direct bias on the indicator character, then the preference character will eventually
reach a stable equilibrium at the value that maximizes fitness. In other words, both
direct and indirect bias will evolve so that naive individuals tend to imitate models
with the optimum value of the indicator trait. The reason this result makes sense
is most clear in the case in which transmission of the preference trait is unbiased.
Here, the only evolutionary forces acting on the mean value of the preference trait
are the effects of selection and direct bias acting through the indicator trait. Naive
individuals who prefer to imitate models with the optimum value of the indicator
trait will be more likely to acquire that value than individuals who prefer some less
adaptive value, and selection favors this preference. This process eventually will
cause the optimum value of the preference trait to predominate in the population.
2. The runaway process. If the strength of indirect bias acting on the preference
character is strong compared to the combined forces of selection and direct bias
acting on the indicator character, then according to the model the values of both the
indicator trait and the preference trait will run away, becoming indefinitely larger
or smaller depending on the initial condition. Clearly, this cannot really occur;
nothing can grow or shrink indefinitely. Some process not accounted for in the
model will eventually restrain the population. The correct lesson to be drawn from
the model is that when the evolution of a preference trait is affected by indirect bias,
the resulting process may be inherently unstable. Where it exists, such instability
is likely to result in one of two outcomes, either an equilibrium in which both the
preference character and the indicator character are quite distant from the optimum,
or permanent oscillations. The outcome depends upon whether the runaway process
is inherently oscillatory and on the nature of the processes which ultimately come
to restrain the population.
3. The “drift-away” process. If no natural selection is acting on the indicator trait
and/or if the effective intensities of direct and indirect bias are equal, then the model

has a line of equilibria. The line may be unstable, which leads to a runaway process
that is qualitatively similar to the case already described. The line may also be
stable, in which case every point on the line is neutrally stable with regard to every
other point on the line. When this is the case, cultural drift will cause finite
populations to drift randomly along the line. (See Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,
1981: 109-124, for an extensive discussion of such random effects.) Stevan Arnold

(personal communication) calls this the “drift-away” process. This case is interesting because it allows any value of the indicator trait to become common, even
if it is selected against. The mean value of the indicator trait in different populations
living in the same environment will drift apart, even though the indicator trait is
subject to strong natural selection and direct bias. This may occur because these
forces are exactly balanced along the line by the force of indirect bias.
It is improbable that the conditions necessary for a line of equilibria to exist will
often be fulfilled exactly. That there would be no selection on the indicator trait,
or that the intensities of indirect and direct bias would be precisely equal, seems
unlikely. However, in many cases of interest, selection may be weak relative to
bias, or difference in the intensities may be small compared to the magnitudes of
selection and bias. There will be a single equilibrium point, but it will be only very
weakly stable in the direction of what would have been the line of equilibria had

268

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

the conditions been exactly fulfilled. Thus, the forces resisting drift will be weak,
and we would expect a large variance in the mean values of the indicator trait in
different populations.
The last two of these three modes of the evolution of indirect bias are likely to
increase the frequency of maladaptive culturally transmitted variants. Can this
behavior be consistent with the origin of the capacity for cultural transmission via
ordinary Darwinian processes? We think that the theory of sexual selection once
again provides some insight. Like indirect bias, runaway (or drift-away) sexual
selection can lead to maladaptive characters, particularly in males. Moreover, the
exaggerated male characters observed in many species seem to be evidence that the
runaway process described by Fisher actually occurs in nature. Fisher reasoned that
this could occur because the male character was originally correlated with fitness.
For example, tails that are larger or showier than average might have been correlated with male fitness in the proto-peacock in a variety of habitats. If a character
is correlated with fitness, then females may benefit by using it to choose their mates.
However, once female choice has evolved, the potential for the runaway process
exists. It is easy to imagine that many species evolve female choice, and in most
of these female choice remains adaptive. However, in a few the necessary conditions for the runaway process exist, and female choice ultimately leads to maladaptive male characters.
A similar argument can be made for the evolution of indirect bias. As we have
argued earlier in this chapter, indirect bias may provide a good general rule of
thumb for choosing among different cultural variants. As long as the indicator trait
is correlated with fitness, an individual can increase his or her chance of acquiring
adaptive cultural variants using indirect bias, particularly in variable environments.
However, just as it may be difficult to know which cultural variants are adaptive
in the local environment, it may also be difficult to determine which variants are
sufficiently correlated with fitness to be useful as indicator traits. In this case, it may

be useful to use indirect bias to modify one’s preference trait. As we have seen, this
can cause the preference trait to evolve to the most adaptive value (case 1 above),

but it can also lead to the evolution of maladaptive variants of the preference and
indicator traits by either the runaway or the drift-away process (cases 2 and 3). We
imagine that indirect bias is adaptive when averaged over many characters and
many societies, but that in some societies, for some characters, the necessary
conditions for the runaway or drift-away processes exist. In these cases, indicator
traits that were initially correlated with fitness become exaggerated.

Possible Examples of the Runaway Process

Do the runaway or drift-away processes actually occur in human societies? Ideally,
data to answer this question would allow us both to trace the trajectory of an
indicator trait from an initially adaptive state to an exaggerated state and to demonStrate that indirect bias was the agent responsible for the exaggeration of the trait.

As far as we know, no such data exist. For the present, we must be satisfied with

circumstantial evidence: the existence of traits that seem consistent with an origin
and maintenance by the runaway process. Such traits should have the following

Possible Examples of the Runaway Process

269

properties: (1) More exaggerated variants should be associated with greater pres-

tige. (2) The values of the trait observed should not make sense from an adaptive

point of view. (3) The observed variant should be plausibly interpreted as an
exaggerated version of a sensible indicator trait. Here we will discuss two such
empirical examples, the practice of growing enormous yams on the island of
Ponapae and the practice of extensive tattooing which was widespread in Polynesia
until recently.
Yams as markers of prestige on Ponapae
According to William Bascom

(1948), on the Micronesian island of Ponapae a

man’s prestige is partially determined by his ability to contribute very large yams
to periodic feasts. Each year several feasts are given by the chief of each district.
In addition to staple foods like fresh breadfruit, coconut, and seafood, the head of

each farmstead contributes a “prize” yam, or yams. Everyone at the feast examines
the yams and praises the contributor of the largest single yam for his generosity and
his skill and ability as a farmer. Moreover, as Bascom reports, “Success in prestige
competition is regarded as evidence of not only a man’s ability, industry, and
generosity, but also of his love and respect for superiors” (p. 215). The chiefs raise
men who are consistent contributors of large yams to titled positions.
Several lines of evidence suggest that this practice is not simply a good way to
provide food for a party, but instead represents an exaggerated marker of prestige.
First, prestige is not correlated with a man’s real contribution to the feast. The
contributions of other important foodstuffs like fresh breadfruit or seafood are
irrelevant to the prestige competition. So too is the total amount of yams that a man
contributes; all that counts is the size and, to a lesser extent, the shape of the largest
individual yam. Moreover, these yams are truly huge; they sometimes exceed 9 feet
in length and 3 feet in diameter, and up to twelve men must carry them. The yams
used by families in their everyday diet are much smaller. Individual farmers go to
great effort to raise large yams. Appropriate varieties must be found and maintained, special, laborious cultivation techniques are used, and great care must be
taken to prevent neighbors from spying out the size of a man’s yams. Bascom
concludes that “the labor expended in growing prize yams is far greater than would
be necessary to produce the same quantity of foodstuff from a larger number of
smaller yams of the same variety” (p. 217). Nor should it be thought this extravagance is possible because there are never shortages of food on Ponapae as, “Not
infrequently families go hungry at home when they have large yams in their farms
ready for harvest” (p. 212).
It is also easy to construct a plausible scenario to explain the evolution of the
practice of growing very large yams based on a runaway process. Suppose that at
some earlier time Ponapaens did not devote any special effort to growing large
yams. It seems reasonable that under such conditions more skillful or industrious
farmers might have tended to bring larger yams to feasts, and thus that the size of

a man’s yams would provide a useful indicator trait for all kinds of skills and beliefs
associated with farming. By imitating the people who grew large yams, naive
individuals could increase the chance that they would acquire the cultural variants
they needed to be successful farmers. Once the size of yams became an indicator

270

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

als with
trait, beliefs or practices that lead to larger yams would increase. Individu
these
acquire
to
likely
a stronger tendency to admire large yams will be more

, when the
beliefs. This will cause the two traits to be correlated—and therefore

practices that lead to larger yams increase, so too will the admiration for the ability
to grow large yams.
Tattooing in Polynesia

The practice of tattooing was widespread in Polynesia until recent times (e.g.

Brown, 1910; Handy and Handy, 1924; Gifford, 1929; Hiroa, 1930). Boys, and to

a lesser extent girls, received their initial tattooing as they approached adulthood.
Later in life some individuals would periodically add embellishments to their
tattoos. In the most elaborate cases, virtually the entire body was covered with
intricate tattoos. While the evidence is somewhat anecdotal, it suggests that this
practice can be understood as a result of the runaway process.
The extent and nature of an individual’s tattoos seem to have been related to his
(or her) prestige. For example, in Samoa
The amount of tattooing an individual possesses is attached significance in the
fashionable Samoan world. Half a suit is of no importance, but if a man can
show an aso tali tu, which begins the second half of the work, he is considered
“all right.” [Handy and Handy, 1924: 21]

and on Mangareva
Tattooing was a necessary adornment in Mangareva. . . . The amount of tattooing that a person underwent depended on his rank and ability to pay. . .the
correct association of extensive tattooing is with successful warriors. [Hiroa,
1938: 176-177]

The evidence also suggests people admire and respect the tattooed. Once again on
Samoa,
custom, personal status, and the approbation of men and women were the
incentives to undergoing the operation. . . . The fear of pain is overcome by
the keen desire to bear the marks of manhood and to be able to hitch the kilts
a little higher at the evening dances and so demonstrate superiority over the
untattooed.

[Hiroa, 1930: 661]

Being tattooed was painful and somewhat dangerous. When a boy reached
maturity, his father would hire a tattoo artist if he had the means. Handy (1922: 12)
reports that, “The operation, as may be imagined, was extremely painful, and the
patient cried and screamed without restraint.” Because the process was so painful,

only about a square foot of the body could be tattooed at one sitting, and then three
to five days were allowed before the next session (Handy, 1922; Linton, 1939).
Sometimes boys could not stand the pain and made do with less elaborate markings
(Hiroa, 1930). Then, “[A]fter each sitting, there were from eight to twelve days of

local inflammation, followed by fever and sometimes swellings, which were at
times fatal” (Handy, 1922: 12), although this was apparently rare (Hiroa, 1930).
Tattooing was also expensive. The initial tattooing of a youth required roughly
at least six months to complete. During this time the father had to supply food and

Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes

271

shelter for the artist and his family. In addition, the tattoo artist required
a consid-

erable payment in the form of mats, waistcloths, and decorations (Handy
and
Handy, 1924). More difficult or elaborate figures required more time and a more
skillful tattoo artist.
Every enhancement within a ban, or on the dark spaces, takes extra time and
care and the artist has to be paid accordingly; not only has to be paid more but
he also eats more food. Hence enhanced designs may only be secured by those
who can pay. [Hiroa, 1930: 654]

Embellishment of existing designs was also costly. As a result only the wealthy
could afford an extensive and elaborate tattooing (Handy, 1922; Hiroa, 1938).
To understand how tattoos could have evolved as markers of prestige, we must
imagine that the extent of a person’s tattooing indicated his usefulness as a model.
The most elaborate tattooing would certainly indicate wealth. It is less clear why
more modest tattooing would be a good indicator trait. Perhaps tattoos once indicated courage and ability to withstand pain, or perhaps they were useful during
warfare to intimidate one’s enemies. Whatever the reason, once tattoos became
associated with prestige, the runaway process could lead to the seemingly maladaptive extremes that were observed in Polynesia.
We believe that many other traits in both simple and complex societies are
plausibly the result of the runaway or drift-away processes that indirect bias can
create. Indeed, we find it difficult to walk through a downtown shopping district or
attend university functions without thinking about indirect bias.

Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes
Some of the most strenuous objections to human sociobiology have come from
symbolic anthropologists, especially from Marshall Sahlins (1976a, 1976b). The
members of this subdiscipline of anthropology believe that symbols are the essential feature of human culture. In fact, they often define culture as a set of symbols
whose meanings are shared by members of a human society. To varying degrees,
symbolic anthropologists believe that the meanings associated with a set of symbols
evolve according to an internal, cultural logic that is at least partially independent
of adaptive considerations. Because the set of meanings shared by a group shapes
the way members of the group perceive the physical and social world in which they
live, culture can strongly affect individual behavior. It can define what is edible and
what is not; to whom an individual owes obligations and to whom he does not.
Thus, according to symbolic views of culture, historical processes which assign
meanings to symbols are at least as important in determining the social organization
or subsistence technology of a group as the nature of its environment.
From the point of view of a human sociobiologist, this argument is unsatisfactory unless it can be made consistent with the argument from natural origins.
Symbol systems are learned, and the hypothesis that learning is structured to
enhance fitness is fundamental to sociobiology. The symbols that encode meanings
may be arbitrary, but the meanings themselves are expected to enhance fitness. We
are not aware of any symbolic anthropologist who has provided a cogent account
of how a system of symbolic culture which promotes maladaptive behavior might

272.

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

have evolved. Sahlins (1976b) supports his claims with an unconvincing attack on
the argument from natural origins and an equally dubious series of empirical
examples that he believes cannot be reconciled with a sociobiological hypothesis.
(His key example of Polynesian adoption practices has been shown by Silk, 1980,
to be consistent with sociobiological expectations.)
In this section, we will argue that dual inheritance models, particularly those
including indirect bias, show how the autonomous symbol systems envisioned by
symbolic anthropologists might have evolved. We will consider three cases: (1)
Under some circumstances, the evolution of symbols may be autonomous without
conflicting with a genetic-fitness-maximizing hypothesis. We call this the “weak
interaction” hypothesis. (2) In still other cases, the runaway or drift-away dynamic
may result in group selection on symbolic traits, so a “group functional” hypothesis
of symbolic evolution must also be entertained. (3) Finally, we will argue that the
runaway and drift-away cases of indirect bias provide an evolutionary basis for
Sahlins’s postulated cultural reason, or something very like it, without violating the
criterion of a plausible natural origin for nonadaptive or maladaptive cultural traits.
Here this hypothesis is labeled “afunctionalism.” Because we often have had
considerable difficulty understanding symbolic anthropologists, our attempt to reinterpret their views is based on rather free interpretations of the original texts. We
are emboldened to offer the following analysis only by the equally frank admission
of practitioners of this subdiscipline that considerable debate over such fundamental
issues divides them, as well (Basso and Selby, 1976; Schwimmer,

1978).

What are symbols?
The key defining feature of symbols is that they are arbitrary. A sign is something
that stands for something else. According to semiotic theory three basic varieties
of signs can be recognized (Jakobson,

1971: 345ff., 697ff.), icons, indices, and

symbols. More properly each of these concepts can be thought of as a quantitative
dimension; any particular sign can be described in terms of the degree to which it
exemplifies the pure type: icon, index, or symbol. Icons are signs that are factually
similar to the thing or process signified. For example, a technical drawing describing farming technique is an icon. An index has a factual connection with the
thing signified. For example, a bulging storage bin and fat cattle are indices of a
farmer’s skill and energy because they are correlated with farming talent. A symbol
is a sign that stands for the thing symbolized by conventional agreement. In
language, it usually does not matter what sound pattern or series of letters are used
to signify a particular thing or concept, it only matters that the members of a speech
community agree on some convention.
Other cultural symbol systems are similar to language, although how similar is
debatable (Silverstein, 1976). The Stars and Stripes serve as a symbol of the
U.S.A. and the Tricolor symbolizes France, but if history had been different and
the flags’ associations were reversed, no problem would arise. The giant yams of
Ponapae are at least partly symbols. Since special skills are needed to grow them,
a giant yam is not necessarily an iconic sign of farming skill or even a good index
of general horticultural talent. Convention could specify quite other means of
signifying prestige in such a horticultural society—the growing of small, perfectly
shaped “bonsai” yams, or spherical yams, or most anything else imaginable.

Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes

273

Nevertheless, the Ponapaens take giant yams quite seriously as icons, or at least
indices, of prestige. Perhaps the ability to grow giant yams even is prestige on
Ponapae, not just a sign of it. However arbitrarily symbolic giant yams appear to
us, they are important to their growers, while bonsai yams and spherical yams
would be irrelevant or perhaps humorous. Thus Sahlins would say that giant yams
are meaningful to Ponapaens, much as steak and the Stars and Stripes are to
Americans. The problems that symbolic anthropologists pose for us are how behaviors that are objectively mere symbols can come to be taken by the native as central
to his existence, and whether such behaviors can be functional.

The weak interaction hypothesis

The evolutionary dynamics of a symbolic system are quite different from those of
ordinary adaptations. The variant words for “cat” in different languages and patterns for flags in different nations are all functionally equivalent. It is very difficult
to see how natural selection, or direct bias, or guided variation can be used to
explain the evolution of such symbols in the same way that is possible for ordinary
phenotypic traits. For each symbolic trait we observe, a very large number of
alternatives are equivalent in terms of fitness. The simplest hypothesis we might
have for the evolution of symbol systems is that the forces involved are only random
variation, drift, and some kind of frequency dependence. In other words, symbol
systems could evolve by the random jiggling of mean usage, combined with
selection or bias against variants that were so distant from the mean as to cause
problems in communication. To the extent that symbol systems function simply for
communication within a culture, these forces might be sufficient.
However, variations in dialect and grammar, for example, can themselves be
used as signs of people’s place in a social system (Labov, 1972; Ervin-Tripp,
1976). Thus symbolic traits often vary as a function of status and prestige, and are
likely to be used as a basis for indirect biases. Even if indirect biases are an
important force in the evolution of symbol systems, such a mechanism may do no
more than speed up the proliferation of symbols or signs to reflect more subtle social
differences. Exactly which dialect variant, costume, or ritual characterizes a group
has no adaptive consequences so long as it does its differentiating job. Any of a
large variety of alternatives would have worked just as well.
Direct bias may also affect the evolution of symbol systems. David Schneider
(1976: 205) writes:
Social life is meaningful; new meanings are established with reference to old
meanings and grow out of them and must be made, in some degree, congruent
with them; and exchange, whenever and wherever it occurs, must be articulated

with the existing system of meanings.

In other words, people prefer to adopt new symbols that bear some comprehensible
relationship to old ones, if only to keep the whole system comprehensible and easy
to remember. Dialect changes spread from core forms to correlated ones (Labov,
1972: 174-175). One of the functions of language appears to be to organize
memory (Simon, 1957; Bandura, 1977: 25—26) so the internal logical organization

of the cultural system may be functionally important. However, the requirement
that a symbol system be a reasonably coherent logical system does not mean that

274

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

there are not many equally functional systems. In a system of arbitrary symbols,
a bias rule enforcing consistency and logical order within the system will not cause
convergence to similar forms in similar environments, as we might expect in the
case of a bias affecting an ordinary trait.
We call this the “weak interaction hypothesis” because relationships between the
content of the symbolic system and the ultimate adaptation-producing force of
natural selection are quite tenuous. (See Cohen, 1974, for a similar hypothesis, but
without a selection-based theory of function. Also see Durham, 1976.) We can
easily explain by a sociobiological hypothesis why humans have symbolic capacities for culture. The main adaptive functions include interpersonal communication
and memory organization. Both of these functions may contribute to more efficient
social learning and hence to more effective use of the various advantages of cultural
transmission. However, since these functions are served equally well by any wellorganized symbolic system, we cannot explain much of the difference between the
structures of different cultural systems by adaptive arguments. Language is the
prototypical case; Chinese is not an adaptation to life on the Yellow River Plain,
nor is English an adaptation to living in the British Isles, except in the very limited
sense that it is useful to speak the language that happens to be common in a given
place. Adaptation in principle puts only the very broadest constraints on the form
of symbolic structures.
The weak interaction hypothesis thus requires a nonfunctional theory to explain
what specific symbols come to have a particular function, but it does not allow
symbolic evolutionary processes to affect functional ones strongly. What symbol
is used for a given meaning may be arbitrary with respect to function, but the
underlying meaning itself is not. As Abner Cohen (1974: 86) puts it:
The analysis of symbolic forms in relation to symbolic functions which is the
central problem of social anthropology can be greatly enhanced through comparing different cultural forms that are carried by different groups. Thus one
aspect of our work is to reduce cultural heterogeneity to functional uniformities.

In terms of the sociobiological theory of function, so long as alternative symbolic
traits differ little in fitness, their evolution will be subject to random variation, drift,

frequency-dependent bias, indirect bias, and internal logical biases without causing
any fitness variation upon which natural selection could operate. The functional
equivalence that results from the arbitrary association of symbols with their referents could result in almost complete autonomy for evolution of the symbol systems
without much disturbing their functional properties.
Symbolic functionalism

A symbolic hypothesis presents a sharp alternative to sociobiological ones if it
proposes an alternative to the standard neo-Darwinian interpretation of function in

terms of genetic fitness. If symbolic traits are especially prone to runaway or
drift-away evolution as a consequence of indirect bias, the between-group cultural
variation generated by this process may be subject to group selection. This in
turn

would favor cultural variants which enhance the cultural success of the group,

even

at the expense of harming that of the individual. This hypothesis is distinct
from

Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes

275

those proposed by Alexander (1974, 1979a) and Hamilton (1975) in which culture

is imagined to facilitate genetic group selection through warfare. The issue here is
not whether humans

are group

selected or not, but whether the mechanism

is

selection on genetic or cultural variation.
In Chapter 7, we showed that frequency-dependent bias could increase the
amount of cultural variation between groups relative to that within groups. This, in
turn, had the effect of increasing the strength of selection between groups relative
to the strength of selection and direct bias within groups. The runaway or drift-away
dynamics that result from indirect bias can also increase the relative strength of
selection between groups. In the drift-away process there is a line of equilibria; each
value on the line is neutrally stable with respect to every other point on the line.
Even a small amount of selection among groups will completely determine where
along the line a population will be at equilibrium. In the runaway process small
differences in initial conditions result in very different unstable trajectories. If, as
we have assumed earlier, some process not accounted for in the model ultimately
causes the population to reach a stable equilibrium, then it may be that such small
initial differences also generate large amounts of equilibrium variation between
groups. This variation could lead to strong group selection.
In the case of the drift-away process we can make these arguments somewhat
more rigorously. Suppose that a population is divided into a large number of finite
subpopulations.
Let the mean of the indicator and preference traits in the jth subpopulation be X;; and Xpj, respectively. Further suppose that the values of Xj;
and Xp; aredistributed according to a bivariate normal distribution with the vector
of means (X;,Xp) and the covariance matrix

Vee
G

Vp

The mean value of the indicator trait in the ith subpopulation is assumed to affect
the size of the jth subpopulation, N;, in the following way:

N; = N exp{—(X, — X*)*/2S}

(8.36)

Subpopulations with different mean values of the indicator trait achieve different
sizes. The nearer the mean value of the indicator trait in a subpopulation is to X",
the larger it is. The strength of this group selection effect is measured by Ss
Let us now consider the forces that affect the distribution of subpopulation
means. The finite subpopulations will vary each generation due to sampling error.
This will have the effect of increasing each of the terms in the covariance matrix
by an amount (1 + 1/N;). It has no average effect on the average values of the
subpopulation means. Next, suppose a fraction m of each subpopulation emigrates
each generation and migrates to a randomly chosen subpopulation. If m is small and
the populations are not too different, this has the effect of reducing each of the terms
in the covariance matrix by a factor of (1 — m). Because larger subpopulations
contribute disproportionately to the pool of migrants, migration has the effect of
moving the average value of the indicator_trait in the entire population, X;, toward X*. Because the values of X; and Xp are correlated, this between-group

276

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

selection will also move the value of xe toward X”. If S is large compared to V;,
this becomes

(mV,/S)(X* — X )
AX;K, == (mV,/S)(

8.37)

AX» = (mC/S)(X* — Xp)
Finally, the subpopulation means respond to the within-population forces of selection and direct and indirect bias. If we combine all of these forces, we get recursions
for the overall population means, variances, and the covariance. It is possible to
show that these recursions will always reach a stable equilibrium in which the
equilibrium values of X; and Xp are equal to X", the value of the indicator trait that
maximizes group size.
This result supports the conjecture that group selection on cultural variation may
be easier when the variants are also subject to indirect bias. In essence, the
drift-away process (and presumably the runaway process too) creates group-level
variation that is protected from selection at the individual level. It is attractive
because it may explain why the altruistic, group functional behavior of humans
seems to be so commonly embedded in systems of supernatural sanctions and costly
rituals. Campbell (1975) has alluded to this problem by noting that religion may
provide a stronger source of adaptive wisdom for people living in modern societies
than sciences like psychology have yet developed. Rappaport (1979: 100) writes of
his proposed functions of Tsembaga ritualized warfare:
I have argued, however,

that there may

be no simple, direct relationship

between the amount of testable empirical knowledge included in a cognized
model and the appropriateness of the behavior it elicits. It is by no means
certain that the representations of nature provided us by science are more
adaptive than those images of the world, inhabited by spirits whom men
respect, that guide the action of the Maring and other “primitives.” To drape
nature in supernatural veils may be to provide her with some protection against
human folly and extravagance.

Similarly, Freilich (1980) argues that the most symbolic culturally transmitted traits
code for “proper,” group functional behavior and are opposed by less symbolic
“smart” traits that are related to individual advantage. Perhaps it is necessary to
remove cognized models from easy attack by individual calculation in order to
achieve group-level functions. Otherwise direct bias, guided variation, and other
forces derived from selection for individual cultural and genetic success may
destroy them. The runaway and drift-away processes derived from the indirect bias
force may provide such protected variants. Finally, Goode (1978) has interpreted
prestige itself as a means of social control. In his functional view of prestige, status
and recognition are normally accorded to those who are most altruistic and effective
at promoting the welfare of the group as a whole.
In its most extreme version, this hypothesis would invert the usual sociobiological interpretation of prestige. Irons (1979b), Dickemann (1979), and others
have argued that the fact that in many societies prestigious males are also polygynous is strong confirmation of the hypothesis that cultural traits enhance genetic
fitness. However, if prestige is accorded mainly for group functional behavior, then

Symbolic Culture and the Runaway and Drift-Away Processes

277

it is possible that group selection acting on cultural variation has favored
patterns
of mating that act to increase the frequency of genes which increase the
success of
the group but would reduce individual fitness in the absence of the culturall
y
acquired mate preference. Throughout this book, we have assumed that genetical
ly
transmitted biases could act to shape the direction of cultural evolution. Cultural
traits which affect mating preference could similarly affect genetic evolution
through the action of sexual

selection.

In effect, the human

genome

could be

“domesticated” by culturally transmitted traits. Much as a prize bull has high
genetic fitness because he contributes to a farmer’s profit, a prestigious figure may
be allowed extra opportunities to reproduce because his genotype produces individuals that tend to be active on behalf of their culture.

Afunctionalism

Marshall Sahlins’s “cultural reason” hypothesis envisions a more radical departure
from sociobiological hypotheses than the weak interaction or cultural group selection proposals. Ultimately, the latter two leave function to be explained by some
form of natural selection, even if selection on culture rather than genes. Sahlins
(1976a: 102) objects:
All these types of practical reason have also in common an impoverished
conception of human symboling. For all of them, the cultural scheme is the sign
of other “realities,” hence in the end obeisant in its own arrangement to other
laws and logics.

While we hesitate to claim that any version of dual inheritance theory directly
translates into Sahlins’s cultural reason, the runaway process does resemble it.
To show that the runaway process conforms to the views of symbolic anthropologists like Sahlins we need to show that it has two properties. First, it must lead
to the evolution of symbols. Second, the dynamics of the evolution of symbols by
the runaway process should, in some sense, be driven by cultural factors, not
genetic or environmental ones.
How does the runaway process create meaningful symbols? The runaway process creates symbolic indicator traits, beginning with icons and indices, in the
following sense: We assumed that initially the admired variant was a good indicator
of adaptive superiority. All other things being equal, it is plausible that the best
farmers would tend to grow the largest yams. Thus at the outset the indicator trait
is an index of farming skill, not yet a symbol of prestige. If the runaway process
ensues, the most admired variant of the indicator trait will not be the most useful
index of an individual’s adaptive traits—it will confer prestige, but only because
the rest of the population believes that it is prestigious. It is likely that farmers could
devote the time and energy necessary to grow gigantic yams to better purposes. It
is true that we can explain the connection between the indicator trait and prestige
by understanding the dynamics of the runaway process, so the connection between
the symbol (giant yams) and the meaning (prestige) is not completely arbitrary.
However, it is in the nature of the runaway process that very small differences in
initial conditions can give rise to very different results. In a different population
starting under almost identical conditions the process might result in a different

278

Indirect Bias and the Evolution of Symbolic Traits

indicator of prestige. It might be the color or shape of the yam that would be
important, or another aspect of farming altogether.

The runaway process can also be thought of as deriving its dynamics from
cultural factors. Once the runaway process has been initiated, the main force acting
on the indicator trait results from the choices made by naive individuals, choices
which are based on their values of the preference trait. Thus we imagine that the
mean amount of time and effort devoted to raising giant yams increases because
people admire and imitate those who grow large yams. The main force acting on
the preference character is due to the same cultural preference. The size of yams
that people find most admirable increases because they have a tendency to acquire
their attitudes about yams from people who grow large yams. Adaptive factors are
necessary to explain the evolution of the indirect bias mechanism, and why some
characters are initially associated with success. But once initiated, a runaway
process follows its own internal logic.
If many different traits have been entrained in this runaway process, each culture
may contain a more or less equal number of afunctional or counterfunctional traits.
Group selection, individual selection, and the other functional forces derived from
them may eliminate the most extreme counterfunctional traits and whole cultures
with an excessive concentration of deleterious traits. However, at equilibrium a
large amount of costly cultural variation might remain in most cultures. If each
culture has approximately the same sum total of functional and counterfunctional
traits, variance in group fitness could be very small even if the mix of functional
and counterfunctional traits is very different in different cultures.
Symbol systems generated in this way would tend to retain a strong internal
logical relationship between the various traits in the system. The runaway process
will generate variation which is random with respect to fitness because small
variations in the initial conditions with respect to the indicator and preference traits
will lead to quite different outcomes. However, the trajectory generated by the
runaway process is smooth, and the traits involved maintain an organized correlation to one another. If this hypothesis is correct, a large amount of cultural
variation might be comprehensible only in terms of the internal logic that drove the
runaway process in each culture. This logic will, however, have more in common
with esthetic than functional design. Much as peacock tails and bowerbird houses
are thought to result from runaway sexual selection, the indirect bias runaway
process will generate traits with an exaggerated, interrelated, aesthetically pleasing
but afunctional form. The functional forces may thus constitute merely “a range of
tolerance in the exploitation of the environment or the satisfaction of biological
requirements beyond which the system as constituted can no longer function—is
‘selected against’” (Sahlins, 1976a: 208). The range of tolerance might be extremely broad if cultural mechanisms control
genetic reproduction as in the previous hypothesis. If the cultural runaway process
entrains actual mate choice, people may come to have genes that cause them to
prefer mates who display a gaudy repertoire of cultural symbols. Perhaps the
elaborate esthetic sense of modern Homo sapiens is as much a consequence as a
cause of cultural evolution.
Notice that in the case of the cultural runaway process colorful displays are not
as likely to be limited to the male sex as they are with the genetic analog. A

Conclusion

279

prestigious male or female can have an unlimited number of cultural offspring by
nonparental transmission, whereas in the genetic case only males can take advantage of multiple matings to increase their fitness enough to compensate for costly
displays. The fact that women as well as men participate in elaborate symbolic
behaviors is more consistent with a cultural than with a genetic runaway explanation.
Even this version of the symbolic hypothesis can be consistent with the notion
that the human cultural inheritance system is adaptive. We have seen that indirect
bias provides a good general inheritance rule because it allows an efficient shortcut
to directly evaluating alternative cultural variants. Thus it is possible that, averaged
over many different traits and many different human groups, indirect bias is adaptive, even though for some traits in some groups it leads to the elaboration of
maladaptive markers of prestige. As in the cases of selection on asymmetrically
transmitted cultural variants and frequency-dependent bias, the cost of individual
evaluation of traits may favor indirect bias even if cultural traits are frequently
entrained in the maladaptive runaway process.
Even if cultural evolution has so completely entrained genetic evolution in the
runaway dynamic that ordinary adaptation exerts only the weakest constraints on
the evolution of symbolic traits, it could have done so without violating the assumption of natural origins. We need only imagine that natural selection favored symbolic capacities and the use of indirect bias during the period when the potential for
the runaway and drift-away arose. Once this potential evolved, even for perfectly
good adaptive reasons, adaptive forces might not be strong enough to prevent
grossly maladaptive outcomes.
Conclusion

It it is often argued that Darwinian theories of evolution must result in adaptive or
functional hypotheses about human behavior (Sahlins 1976a, 1976b). The results
of this chapter demonstrate that this argument is incorrect. Nonadaptive, or even
frankly maladaptive, cultural variants can spread in a population under the
influence of indirect bias, even in the face of selection and direct bias favoring more

adaptive variants. Furthermore, the runaway or drift-away situation arises naturally
from the genetically adaptive uses of indirect bias. Hypotheses derived from models of indirect bias may or may not correspond closely to those sought by symbolic
anthropologists to explain symbolic behavior, or some alternative hypothesis based
on individual self-interest may ultimately be shown to best explain the data. However, we do believe that the models of this chapter demonstrate that dual inheritance
models offer a wide variety of systematically linked hypotheses about the nature of

human behavior.

9
Conclusion
All resemblances of social origin in society are the direct or indirect fruit of the
various forms of imitation, —custom-imitation or fashion-imitation, sympathyimitation or obedience-imitation, precept-imitation or education-imitation, naive imitation, deliberate imitation, etc. In this lies the excellence of the contem-

poraneous method of explaining doctrines and institutions through their history.
It is a method that is certain to come into more general use.
Gabriel Tarde, The Laws of Imitation (1903, p. 14)

The turn-of-the-century French sociologist Gabriel Tarde believed that invention
and imitation were the crucial distinguishing features of human life. In The Laws
of Imitation, he described his attempt to build a theory of “pure sociology” based
on the dynamics of these two processes. He thought that the historical development
of “doctrines and institutions” was driven by a “logical duel.” Doctrines and
institutions arise by invention and spread by imitation. People are often exposed to
two similar ideas that conflict with each other. In the end the conflict must be
resolved by the overthrow of one idea by the other, or by some reconciliation
between them.
Fateful decisions by the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century founders of
the disciplines that constitute the biological and social sciences created the logical
duels that we still struggle to resolve by triumphs or compromises. The unified
character of a previous generation of scientific theorizing, perhaps best exemplified
by Darwin’s attempts to include humans in the compass of evolutionary theory and
at its worst by Spencer’s speculative analogizing, broke down. A detailed examination of the reasons for this development is best left to professional historians of
science. However, it is interesting to examine the rationales given by Tarde’s
generation, who did so much to create the form of modern science.

Tarde made two important choices in the elaboration of his theory: (1) he set
aside all biological considerations in an effort to develop a “sociology pure and
abstract” and (2) he rejected the notion of “the adaptation of living or social types
to external phenomena” as a legitimate mode of explanation (Tarde, 1903 [1962]:
xxi-Xxii; 141). He defended the rejection of biological considerations mostly as a
practical matter of disciplinary specialization; these were important but better left
to other, more competent specialists. But he also argued that biological explanations of human differences had been overemphasized and that the laws of imitation gave a truer and more hopeful account of human progress than racist theories.
Tarde rejected adaptation to external conditions as a prelude to his development of
a scheme of internal, logical, and extralogical laws of imitation.

These choices, and similar ones made by Tarde’s contemporaries, defined the
280

Conclusion

281

major issues in the scientific study of the human species; we still debate them in
much the same terms today. Here there is a certain appeal to Tarde’s model of the
“logical duel.” Once invented and diffused, contradictory ideas struggle for supremacy until one is triumphant or until a resolution is invented. The invention and
initial spread of different ideas might have led to different disciplinary structures
and scientific debates.
Many of the principals in the current debate about the roles of culture and
biology in human behavior argue for the triumphant overthrow of views in conflict
with their own. With regard to the importance of biology and adaptation, all of the
logically possible combinations are stoutly defended by one group of scholars or
another. Like Tarde, Marshall Sahlins (1976a, 1976b) argues that both the effects

of genes and adaptation to economic or ecological circumstances can be safely
ignored in explanations of culture in favor of factors internal to the logic of culture.
By contrast, Marvin Harris (1968, 1979) proposes that adaptation to material
conditions by cultural mechanisms is paramount but asserts that the effects of genes
on this process are of little or no importance. Human sociobiologists (such as Irons,
1979a) take a third position: that genetic adaptation is paramount and that there are
various mechanisms by which imitation might be constrained to enhance biological
fitness. Finally, ethologists, some sociobiologists, and perhaps classical social
Darwinists (Bannister, 1979) have often argued that biology plays a large role in
human behavior but that these traits were selected under past environments and are
often quite pathological under contemporary conditions.
We think a reconciliation of these views is more likely than the triumph of one.
Human beings are both biological and cultural organisms. Systems of inheritance
have internal structure and relationships to the external world. Individuals are the
products of gene pools and cultures; they are loci of natural selection and decision
making. Clifford Geertz’s (1973: 44) plea expresses our feelings almost exactly:
“we need to replace the ‘stratigraphic’ conception of the relations between the
various aspects of human

existence with a synthetic one; that is, one in which

biological, psychological, sociological, and cultural factors can be treated as variables within unitary systems of analysis.” It is certainly likely that in isolated
instances certain explanations of human behavior will be triumphantly rejected. For
example, we do not think that genetic differences between races for behavioral
traits will prove important. However, most proposals regarding the causes of
human behavior seem to have some merit, at least as interesting hypotheses. A
synthetic rather than stratigraphic conception of the aspects of human behavior
studied by the disciplines in the social and biological sciences seems to us to be
more fruitful.
That genes and culture, individuals and populations, and adaptation and symbols
all play a role in human evolution is a truism, yet the twentieth-century scientific
debates about human behavior result from giving causal priority to one element or
another. In the absence of models which explicitly link the elements, say genes and
culture, the commonsensical middle position has nothing to offer except the truism,
while the extreme positions are at least provocative and interesting.
In this chapter we do three things. First, we summarize the main results of the
book. This is not an easy task since it seems that the presence of two systems of
inheritance leads to complex evolutionary problems and possibilities. Second, we

282

Conclusion

try to show that some of these diverse possibilities correspond to the hypotheses that
figure in traditional scientific debates over the causes of human behavior. This
discussion is designed to emphasize the role that dual inheritance theory might play
in unifying the human sciences. It summarizes our argument that the theory can be
used to construct many different plausible hypotheses in a common framework that
allow us to understand, if not the real world, at least how our various theories of
it are related to each other. Finally, we outline what we think are the most important
theoretical and empirical gaps in our present understanding of human evolution and
behavior. On the theoretical side, the set of sample theories and general models we

and others have constructed obviously need to be extended. On the empirical side,
more information is necessary to constrain the selection of appropriate sample
theories and to test the predictions of general models.
Summary of Main Results

The main virtue of the Darwinian approach to the study of cultural evolution is that
it provides a natural framework for expressing the relationship between the causal
elements that combine to produce human behavior. It often allows apparently
conflicting, opposed hypotheses to be formulated as special cases of more general
models and gives logical structure to mixed or intermediate hypotheses. For example, the degree of the coupling of cultural traits to genes can be expressed by the
strength of genetically transmitted determinants of the guided variation and bias
forces. According to Rapoport (1967), many seemingly irreconcilable scientific
conflicts have been resolved by theories of this kind.
Mechanisms and origins
We have tried to build models to answer two related kinds of questions: First, given
assumptions about the structure of cultural transmission, how might evolution
proceed? If the assumptions of the analysis are empirically correct and the model
a reasonable one, we obtain some understanding of how evolution works. Second,
we want to understand under what circumstances a particular structure of cultural
transmission is likely to be adaptive: why do particular structures or behaviors
exist? Answers to such “why” questions are more fundamental, but necessarily
more speculative and problematical, than answers to “how” questions.
Some biologists are critical of the “adaptationist program” in evolutionary biology, and especially of attempts to apply it to the human case (Gould and Lewontin,
1979). Abuses of adaptive arguments are fairly common. Functional “just-so”
stories are easy to construct, the side effects of changes in one character on other
characters are sometimes ignored, and assumptions of equilibrium may often be
incorrect. Evolutionary accidents and random events, even on a grand scale, may
play a role in evolution (Stanley, 1979).
It is important to keep in mind, however, that hypotheses invoking accidents or

disequilibrium are equally prone to abuse. Such hypotheses are difficult to test
empirically because they are intrinsically more complex and because they involve
dimly understood events of the past. If ordinary adaptive explanations are prone to
the just-so problem, so are these alternatives. Moreover, such hypotheses provide

Summary of Main Results

283

too convenient a way to rescue the assumption that humans have transcended
nature. Humans seem to be predisposed to believe that culture provides a fundamentally superior mode of adaptation. Our understandable desire to see humans
elevated somehow above the common run of beasts ought to be taken into account
before we accept explanations entailing accidental evolutionary “breakthroughs.”
The cultural inheritance system
In Chapter 3 we defined culture as the information affecting phenotype acquired by
individuals by imitation or teaching. The crucial problem addressed in that chapter
was whether or not culture can usefully be described as a system of inheritance. We
concluded that a number of lines of evidence, ranging from the psychological
properties of social learning to the existence of the cultural analog of phylogenetic
inertia, support this assumption. The most important source of ambiguity is the
difficulty in estimating the relative importance of cultural variation, genetic variation, and the effects of correlated environments. All three factors can cause
behavioral similarities in families, among whom data are most easily collected. The
data do not contradict the common assumption that the bulk of human behavioral
variation is cultural, but neither do they rule out an important role for genes or for
the effects of correlated environments.
We believe that the evidence is sufficient to justify theoretical analyses that
depend upon the assumption of large amounts of heritable cultural variation. In
Chapter 3, we introduced very simple models in which naive individuals accurately
copied their cultural parents. We supposed that errors occurred but that they were
random and unsystematic. Not surprisingly, such models show that unbiased copying leaves the mean variant in the population unchanged. This, in turn, suggests
that we look for processes which systematically affect the frequency of different
variants in the population.

Inheritance of acquired variation
Cultural transmission differs from genetic transmission because it includes the
inheritance of acquired variation. Errors in social learning, other random environmental effects on behavior, and systematic, nonrandom variations acquired by
learning may be transmitted. The effects of random errors, the cultural analog of
mutation,

were

included in many

of the models

in the book.

For example,

in

Chapter 3 we noted their possible role in maintaining variation in the face of
blending inheritance. Usually, however, we chose to concentrate on forces that
affect mean trait values and frequencies.
In Chapter 4, we analyzed a model in which a simple model of learning was
coupled with cultural transmission. A naive individual first learned its parent’s
behavior, and then modified what it acquired according to a learning rule that was
assumed to result in behavior which, on average, more closely approximates a goal
that is contingent on the individual’s environment. The result is an evolutionary
force, labeled the force of “guided variation,” that moves the mean behavior of the

population toward the goal of learning. The strength of this force depends on the
amount of learning, but even quite weak learning can lead to a potent evolutionary

284

Conclusion

force. Unlike the forces that result from biased transmission and natural selection,
the force of guided variation is independent of the amount of variation in the trait
in the population.
It might seem that such a capacity to transmit the results of parents’ learning to
children acts as an unmitigated adaptive advantage by cutting the children’s cost of
learning. We saw in Chapter 4 that this reasoning is incorrect. Even when cultural
transmission itself imposes no costs, it is most likely to be favored, relative to
genetic transmission plus ordinary learning, only in environments that are not too
variable.
Sequential transmission and the bias forces
Although we have often spoken of naive individuals imitating experienced models,
the distinction between the two is only relative. Even an infant engaging in its first
episodes of social learning is an active, sentient organism. In general, we do not
expect imitation to be a passive process. Individuals are likely to evaluate alternative traits and alternative models and adopt some traits disproportionately on the
basis of such evaluations. We termed the series of evolutionary forces that result
from these processes biased transmission and distinguished three types: (1) direct
biases exercised by evaluating the traits to be adopted by their own properties, (2)
frequency-dependent biases in which the commonness or rarity of traits is used as
the criterion for adoption, and (3) indirect biases which result from choosing
models on the basis of index traits, after which other traits are imitated without
further evaluation.
The psychological mechanisms responsible for direct bias overlap substantially
with those that underlie guided variation. One can think of direct bias as a kind of
trial-and-error learning in which modeled behaviors, instead of self-generated ones,

are used as trials to be tested against the guiding criteria. Like guided variation,
even weak biases can move the population toward the optimum trait value (or
toward high frequencies of the variant favored by the bias, at any rate) fairly
rapidly. Unlike the force of guided variation, all of the bias forces depend on the
existence of cultural variation; rates of evolution are maximal when variation is a

maximum.
Direct bias and guided variation are also similar because they are derived
“decision-making” forces. Understanding their adaptive significance requires us to
examine the guiding criteria that control how alternative cultural variants are
evaluated. Ultimately, we must understand these derivative forces in terms of
natural selection and random effects operating on either genetic or cultural variation
in the rules that govern how choices are made. In Chapter 5, we attempted to
deduce what kinds of genetic determinants of biases might be favored by selection
on genes, concluding that general biases have an advantage in spatially variable
environments. As with guided variation, the adaptive advantages of culture appeared to be greatest when culture provides a way of adapting to a variable
environment that is not available to genes directly. General-purpose direct biases
are a mode of adaptation to spatial variation useful in situations where migration
rates are too high to allow a really effective genetic response. As a corollary, the
models suggested that genetic differentiation between human populations for deter-

Summary of Main Results

285

minants of biases is unlikely. The intensity of selection on the determinants of
biases is always weaker than selection on genes determining phenotypes more
directly. If genetic adaptation to variable environments is favored, it is more likely
to be via direct genetic specification of behavior than indirectly through biases.
The crucial determinant of the strength of direct bias and guided variation is the
cost of estimating which cultural variant is favored in the local environment. If this
cost is high, our model predicts that direct bias and guided variation will be weak
or even nonexistent. Weak learning will allow cultural variation to be preserved.
On the other hand, if costs are low, strong biases or guided variation might evolve.

In the case of guided variation, strong learning implies that little use is made of
culture at all. Strong bias implies little heritable cultural variation; people might
choose ideas from a large common

pool, as suits their circumstances, rather than

from a small sample of models whom they come to measurably resemble.
The available empirical data do not support any sweeping generalizations about
the strength of guided variation and directly biased transmission. However, some
evidence suggests that direct bias and guided variation may be weak for at least
some classes of traits. The evidence from social learning theory (reviewed in Chap.
3) indicates that many traits are acquired by imitation and are only weakly
influenced by trial-and-error learning. Psychometric data appear to show substantial heritability of cultural traits, and the existence of cultural inertia indicates that
cultural trait frequencies change relatively slowly. The evidence from behavioral
decision theory suggests that humans’ ability to make accurate choices is quite
modest. Often, people acquire cultural theories about the world based on weak or
nonexistent evidence

(this will lead to weak biases) and then are resistant to

disconfirming experience. Finally, decision-making costs are likely to be especially
high for many common choices that have low “trialability’—whom to marry, what
occupation to choose, what major capital investments to make, whether to convert
to another religion, and so forth. For such behaviors, an individual can try only one
to a few alternatives in a lifetime, and mistakes are generally costly.

Asymmetric transmission and the natural selection of cultural variations
If we are correct, the forces of guided variation and direct bias are often weak
enough to lead to substantial cultural variation, and therefore natural selection will
be an important force acting to change the frequency of different cultural variants.
It seems likely that individuals characterized by some cultural variants will be more
likely to survive or attain social positions that cause them to be imitated than
individuals characterized by other variants. When this is true, natural selection will
increase the frequency of those variants. However, when the cultural and genetic
transmission systems are asymmetric, the variants favored by selection on cultural
variants need not be those which would optimize genetic fitness.
Two inheritance systems are asymmetric when their patterns of transmission
differ. In many diploid sexually reproducing organisms, the inheritance of sex and
autosomal chromosomes is asymmetric. Cultural and autosomal genetic transmission are asymmetric to the extent that models other than genetic parents are
effective in cultural transmission or when the two biological parents have unequal
weights. Since virtually every society allocates roles in socialization of children to

286

Conclusion

adults other than genetic parents, and because peers can learn from one another,
cultural and genetic transmission are often asymmetric. Different elements of the
cultural repertoire are also commonly transmitted asymmetrically with respect to
each other.
Asymmetric transmission may commonly be genetically adaptive, and hence a
capacity for this form of cultural inheritance may be favored. Since cultural transmission is sequential and occurs over a long span of time, the capacity for asymmetric transmission acts as insurance against the death or absence of genetic
parents. Increasing the effective number of cultural parents via asymmetric transmission also increases the effectiveness of direct, frequency-dependent, and indirect biases. Indeed, frequency-dependent bias is not possible unless cultural transmission is asymmetric; if, as we have argued, these forms of biased transmission

provide a good general purpose way of increasing the chance of acquiring locally
favored variants, then this must favor asymmetric transmission.

In our view, the most interesting potential effect of asymmetric transmission is
the way natural selection can act on asymmetrically transmitted variants. If models
occupying social roles other than that of genetic parent are important in cultural
transmission, and if cultural variation affects which people attain these roles, then
selection can increase the frequency of cultural variants that reduce ordinary genetic
fitness. (Analogous results obtain in the case of asymmetries within the genetic
system, Hamilton, 1967.) In metaphorical terms, if opportunities for asymmetric
transmission exist, individuals may be forced to “decide” between increasing their
genetic and their cultural fitness. For example, modern middle-class young adults
seem to reduce the number of children they have, and to direct resources to the
achievement of professional success, in order to have an effective role in horizontal

or oblique transmission. Similarly, in big-man-dominated horticultural societies,
those who compete for high-status roles seem to depend on the exploitation of
relatives to achieve influence. In agricultural societies, parents often manipulate
their children in order to live a comfortable old age. When age confers high status,
elders could be sacrificing their genetic interest in their children and grandchildren
for the chance to be active in oblique transmission.

Frequency-dependent bias

Frequency-dependent bias occurs whenever individuals who are exposed to more
than two models are disproportionately likely to imitate the common types (con-

formist transmission) or the rare types (nonconformist transmission). In Chapter 7,

we showed that conformist frequency-dependent bias creates a force which acts to
increase the frequency of the more common cultural variant in the population. This
means that, in a heterogeneous environment, it also has the effect of greatly
reducing the importance of a given degree. of migration into a semi-isolated subpopulation from surrounding ones.
“When in Rome, do as the Romans do” expresses the simplest adaptive consequence of a frequency-dependent bias. The prevailing behavior of the inhabitan
ts
of a local area may be superior to that of immigrants and visitors if local condition
s
are special. A frequency-dependent bias is likely to be advantageous
in spatially

Summary of Main Results

287

heterogeneous habitats because this decision rule is probably inexpensive compared
to a detailed evaluation of various alternatives.
Frequency-dependent bias also has the effect of decreasing variation within
groups and increasing and preserving variation between groups. In Chapter 7 we
modeled how cultural group selection might work and argued that some of the
patterns of human altruism can be explained by this mechanism. We also argued
that the evidence regarding the scale of cooperation, for example within ethnic
groups, is difficult to reconcile with any model, including sociobiological models,
which portrays human behavior as self-interested in the inclusive fitness sense.
Indirect bias

Indirectly biased transmission occurs when some traits—we called them indicator
traits—affect an individual’s attractiveness as a model for other traits. For example,
being characterized by a dialect that indicates prestige may cause an individual to
be an attractive model for beliefs about innovations or attitudes toward political
issues. The possibility of imitating models other than genetic parents, and of
imitating different models for different traits, means that indirect bias is potentially
a very important force. It acts to increase the frequency of traits that are correlated
with the indicator trait on which the choice or preference trait operates. Several
transmission effects and forces tend to build and preserve the covariation between
indicator traits and incidental ones.
Indirect bias can be an effective decision rule for acquiring adaptive information.
As Flinn and Alexander (1982) argue, imitating those who appear to be successful
in a particular habitat is a commonsensical rule, and we showed in Chapter 8 that
this intuition is indeed correct. In a spatially or temporally varying environment
some characters, such as wealth, may be correlated with fitness in a variety of
habitats. When this is the case, indirect bias provides an economical way of
increasing one’s chance of acquiring locally adaptive cultural variants.
On the other hand, indirect bias can lead to unstable runaway or drift-away
dynamics analogous to those that may operate in some cases of sexual selection.
We suppose that indirect bias becomes established because of its adaptive advantages and that under most circumstances this may be the only result. However, if
certain conditions are met, the system evolves by the dynamic of indirect bias
alone. If the average person prefers to accord high prestige to (and imitate the
behavior of) people with above-average values of the indicator trait, the preferences
can continue to evolve, dragging the indicator trait up another notch as well. We
know this process as “keeping up with the Joneses.” In imitating the Joneses’ new
car purchase, we may also have acquired the Joneses’ heightened sensitivity to cars
as markers of status, doing our bit to feed the further evolution of the system.
The runaway and drift-away cases may also create between-group variation that
can be affected by group selection. For example, in the runaway case, an accident
of initial conditions might have caused evolution to run in the direction of pious
self-denial instead of conspicuous consumption. The average person might tend to
admire somewhat older or less expensive cars than people on average own. If
variation between groups is not destroyed by the flow of ideas between groups, then

288

Conclusion

selection among groups will favor those groups in which the runaway (or driftaway) process has increased the frequency of variants that enhance their success in
competition with other groups. This argument may explain why the ethical systems
that bind complex societies together are deeply embedded in complex systems of
meaningful symbols; the norms that regulate individual conduct for the good of the
group might originally have been produced as accidental by-products of the evolution of the symbol system.
Culture, costly information, and the argument from natural origins
A central concern of this book has been to assess the human sociobiologists’ claim
that human behavior can be understood in the same way as the behavior of other
animals—by investigating how alternative behaviors affect genetic fitness. This
claim is based on what we called the argument from natural origins: since humans
evolved from acultural ancestors,

and since selection can only favor traits that

increase the fitness of their bearers, it is likely that the human capacity for cultural
inheritance enhances genetic fitness. Human sociobiologists interpret this argument
to mean that we can understand particular behaviors of people in particular societies, or classes within societies, by analyzing how alternative variants of those
behaviors affect genetic fitness.
The argument from natural origins itself is compelling, but the human
sociobiologists’ interpretation is not because they failto account for the fact that
individual learning sometimes is costly and error prone. When this is the case, it
may be more efficient to copy the behavior of others than to make an elaborate
individual search for the optimal behavior. In many circumstances the behavior of
experienced conspecifics is closer, on the average, to the optimal behavior than the
behavior that a naive individual could discover by itself. If imitation is also easier
than trial-and-error learning, then it seems plausible that social learning would be
favored by selection. The models in Chapters 4 and 5 show that this argument is
cogent; a strong dependence on social (as opposed to individual) learning can be
favored by selection in many kinds of variable environments. Once cultural transmission is established, selection on the capacity for culture can use the properties
of cultural transmission to reduce the cost of individual decision making still
further. Rules of thumb for acquiring culture, such as indirect and frequencydependent biases, can substitute for trial-and-error learning. There often appear to
be genetic fitness advantages to asymmetric transmission, if only to make better use
of the bias forces. However, asymmetric transmission can create patterns of cultural variation on which natural selection can act to favor variants which do not
maximize genetic fitness, such as limitations on family size to increase individuals’
abilities to transmit culture to individuals other than offspring. Cultural behaviors
that are irrelevant or counter to genetic fitness can also evolve in the runaway and
drift-away cases of indirect bias.
Even if many cultural traits have evolved away from genetic fitness maximizing
values, the cultural transmission system as a whole can be fitness maximizing. It
need only be the case that the costs of stronger individual learning, more accurate
biases, and more symmetrical transmission are higher than the costs imposed by the
evolution of nonoptimal cultural traits. Selection for genetic capacities for culture

The Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory

289

should favor those with maximum total benefits averaged over many individuals
and many generations, even if reducing information costs means that most individuals carry many nonoptimal cultural traits, considered one trait at a time. The
available evidence is consistent with the assumption that people do depend extensively on weakly biased cultural transmission to acquire the bulk of their behavioral
repertoires. In evolving a reliance on cultural transmission, the human species may
well have “traded” high rates of random error caused by individual learning in
variable environments for a lower rate of systematic error (with respect to genetic
fitness) due to the partial autonomy of cultural evolution.
By taking account of the cost of acquiring information, we were able to construct
a variety of hypotheses about the origin of culture and the mechanisms by which
genes and culture interact, all of which are consistent with the argument from
natural origins. These range from sociobiological hypotheses in which human
behavior tends strongly to maximize genetic fitness to hypotheses in which the
runaway case of indirect bias has entrained genetic evolution by setting up criteria
for mate choice. Moreover, it is easy to formulate intermediate hypotheses and to
imagine that the extent to which human behavior maximizes genetic fitness depends
on the kind of trait, the structure of cultural transmission in particular societies, the
environmental situation, and other details.

The Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory
The skeptical reader who has come this far with us (or the impatient one who has
turned to this chapter in order to peek at our summary) may be disturbed by the
qualified nature of our conclusions. Constructing an acceptable science of human
behavior has always been confusing, complex, and controversial. Does dual inheritance theory offer a way out of these traditional difficulties, or does it merely
express them in new words? The answer is that dual inheritance theory is useful
because it allows us to view opposing arguments as variants of a single theory that
differ in their assumptions about the structure of cultural inheritance and the relative
magnitude of the various forces affecting cultural evolution. Traditional controversies can ultimately be resolved by measuring the properties of cultural transmission and thereby determining which variant of the more general model is
appropriate. In other words, we believe that the Darwinian models of cultural
evolution that we and others have constructed can often clarify the issues involved
in explaining human behavior so that steady progress can be made by further
empirical and theoretical work.
If this claim is correct, a Darwinian theory of cultural evolution can play the
same unifying role that its analog does in biology. It could be argued that Darwin’s
main contribution to biology was not his theory of natural selection but rather his
recognition that the key to understanding organic evolution is the close study of
heritable variation; if we can account for how heritable variation is transmitted,

expressed in organisms, and modified with descent from ancestors, we understand
evolution. To be sure, Darwinian biology triumphed over natural theology and
earned an important place in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century science because natural selection offered a sound, materialistic basis for a theory of organic
evolution. However, Darwinian theory owes part of its ongoing vitality to the fact

290

Conclusion

that it acts as a framework for progressive empirical investigation and theory
building. The Darwinian framework has unified biologists, even when they have
disagreed violently about the nature of the forces governing evolution. For example, none of the principals in the fierce debate that rocked biology after the rediscovery of Mendel’s laws (Provine, 1971) disagreed that evolutionary problems
should be framed in terms of the dynamics of heritable variation, only about how
the forces of evolution actually worked. Once the genetical theory of natural
selection of Fisher and Wright was understood, it could be used together with
measured selection and mutation rates to provide a unified understanding of evolutionary processes satisfactory to Mendelians and Darwinians. Nor do any of those
engaged in the contemporary debate over the relevance of the microevolutionary
processes to the macroevolutionary events, as seen in the fossil record, disagree
with this fundamental postulate (Stebbins and Ayala, 1981; Gould, 1982). By his

correct choice of the essence of the problem, Darwin began the construction of a
general theory that structured scientific debate, spurred experiments, and hence
permitted scientific progress.
In the social sciences, no such framework has gained wide acceptance. This has
led to the “cyclical and repetitive opposition” of theoretical explanation described
by Sahlins (1976a: 102). In order to illustrate the contribution we think our theory
makes, we will review our results in terms of three problems in the social sciences
that have led to long-continued unproductive debates. The first of these problems
is the relationship between synchronic (ecological) and-diachronic (historical) processes in explaining human behavior. Explanations based on one or the other often
are treated as competing whereas in dual inheritance theory they are complementary. Second, the relationship between individuals and cultures or societies
has been the locus of repeated debate between theorists who begin with one unit of
analysis or the other. Our models suggest that the relationship between individuals
and groups is indeed problematical but that the answer to the puzzle rests in solving
certain reasonably well defined empirical problems. Finally, there are longstanding conflicts over the role of the symbolic attributes of human culture and
cognition. Can symbols affect cultural evolution in some fundamental way?
The relationship between ecological and evolutionary processes
By and large, social scientists have not attempted to link the day to day events in
the lives of individuals (ecological or synchronic processes) and the long-term or
large scale patterns of human societies (historical or diachronic processes). Until
quite recently, theorists of cultural evolution showed little interest in underlying
mechanisms of evolution (Campbell, 1965, 1975). For example, in anthropology,
Julian Steward’s (1955) method of cultural ecology was not satisfactorily linked to
his descriptive theory of multilinear evolution, though he obviously assumed that
some link must exist. Contemporary human ecologists like Vayda and Rappaport
(1968) seem to view historical and ecological explanations as either competing or
separate but complementary.
In biology, Darwinian theory is a unified theory of evolution and ecology.
Evolutionary processes affect ecological ones because the physiology and behavior
of individuals are affected by the genetic composition of the population. At the

The Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory

291

same time, the processes of evolution, and hence the ultimate causes of what genes

individuals inherit, are ecological in character. Ecologists end up with a theory of
what adaptations to expect in given environmental circumstances, and evolutionists
have a satisfactory theory of organic history.
The central presupposition of dual inheritance theory is that a similar causal
relationship between ecological and evolutionary processes governs cultural evolution. Processes on an evolutionary time scale affect contemporary behavior because they determine the nature of the cultural traditions that characterize any
society. On the other hand, to understand evolutionary processes we must understand the forces that act on an ecological time scale to affect cultural variation as
it is carried through time by a succession of individuals.
To see how this connection is made, imagine that two groups with independent
cultural histories move into a new, unfamiliar ecological zone. The new zone is,

let us say, especially well suited to nomadic pastoralism, but one of the original
groups is agricultural by tradition, the other hunts and gathers. If learning were
costless, both groups would adopt pastoral nomadism immediately. A synchronic
ecological theory would explain behavior quite well. If cultural traditions were
extremely stable, both groups would retain their traditional modes of life
indefinitely in the new zone even in the face of severe penalties for doing so. The
ecological theory would be useless, and a diachronic historical explanation would
be necessary. More likely, neither model would work well. In Chapter 3 we
reviewed evidence that much of the behavior observed in any one generation must
be explained by cultural transmission from the previous generation, and in later
chapters we analyzed the forces that will make more or less strong, environmentally
contingent changes in culture each generation. For example, in Chapter 4 we
analyzed models of guided variation that suggest that an exclusive dependence on
either individual learning or tradition is unlikely in general. To continue our
example, both societies will acquire new traits by invention and diffusion over a
period of several generations as new adaptations are developed. Some techniques
and values will spread more rapidly than others, and the rates will likely be different
in the two societies. Evolutionary forces imposed by the environment will be strong
for some behaviors, such as basic subsistence techniques, weaker for others, such

as modes of social organization, and virtually absent for still others, such as
grammar and syntax. Historical differences may lead the two societies to develop
quite different ultimate adjustments to the new zone, particularly if they compete.
Perhaps the original hunting group might develop a pure pastoralism in poorer parts
of the zone, whereas the original farming group might preempt a few oases and
combine herding and agriculture. After many generations, each society will contain
some traits that are recognizably related to those of its distant past, some that have
developed and spread in the recent past, some that are still developing and spreading, and some that have been borrowed from other groups.
Cultural transmission leads to persistence of behavioral traits through time, but

generation by generation, even day by day if our measurements were fine enough
to detect it, traditions are modified by accident, individual choices, and natural
selection. The causes of historical change, the forces of cultural evolution in our

terms, are processes that occur synchronically, but typically take many generations
to complete their work. If this view is correct, synchronic and diachronic expla-

292

Conclusion

nations of human behavior are merely different ways of looking at the same suite
of causal processes, the action of evolutionary forces on the genetic and cultural
systems of inheritance.
The relationship between individuals and populations
Social scientists typically have viewed the society (or population) and the individual as antithetical starting points for theory. Social scientists who have adopted a
methodological individualism, for example economists, paint a different picture of
human behavior from those social scientists who take the society as the basic unit
of analysis, like the followers of Durkheim. Marxists and others who select classes
or interest groups as the basic unit reach still different conclusions. It seems likely
that much of this diversity of opinion stems from the complexity of human social
systems. For example, human social behavior is sometimes characterized by remarkable levels of coordination and cooperation but other times by extreme selfinterest. Both the proponents of group-level functionalism and those who argue that
individual self-interest predominates can easily find many empirical facts that are
consistent with their respective interpretations.
Dual inheritance theory provides a natural way to link processes at the individual
level with those at the level of the group. If any of the transmission models we
developed in Chapter 3 and applied in the rest of the book are at all faithful to
reality, cultural evolution, like genetic evolution in a sexual species, is always a
group or population phenomenon. This is so because social learning is a process by
which individuals acquire samples (often quite biased samples, to be sure) of their
society’s total collection of cultural variants. The cultural traditions of society are,
in this minimal sense, imposed on individuals. However, this fact alone does not

allow us to deduce whether evolutionary processes will favor individually advantageous or group functional traits. To understand why a group is characterized by
a particular distribution of variants, we must understand how the forces of cultural
evolution act on the group. Some of these forces have their origin in the psychology
of individuals. Learning and rational calculation will affect the frequency of different cultural variants through the action of the forces of guided variation and biased
transmission. Other forces are the result of larger scale social processes. Cultural
transmission creates heritable variation between individuals and groups. Many
social processes can increase the frequency or salience of some kinds of individuals
or groups through the force of natural selection. To understand the cultural traditions that characterize a particular society, we need to estimate the net effects of
these various forces.
In Chapters 7 and 8 we considered the evolution of moral systems which require
altruistic self-sacrifice. We assumed that the forces rooted in individual psychology
would generally tend to favor selfish moral beliefs. On the other hand, it also seems
plausible that human groups whose members hold self-sacrificial beliefs, which in
turn lead to effective cooperation and a larger supply of public goods, would be
more successful associations than groups whose members were solely selfinterested. Given these assumptions, direct bias and guided variation would act to
increase the frequency of individually advantageous beliefs within groups, while
selection between groups would act to decrease the frequency of such beliefs to the

The Utility of Dual Inheritance Theory

293

extent to which self-interest conflicts with cooperative activities. The relative
strength of these two processes will depend on the relative amounts of culturally
transmitted variation within and between groups. In Chapter 7 we showed that if
people are predisposed to imitate locally more common cultural variants (a form of
frequency-dependent bias), group selection may predominate. In Chapter 8 we
analyzed models of indirect bias in which drift-away and runaway dynamics similarly might lead to substantial group variation on which selection could act. In
general, such models make it possible to explain the curious mixture of selfishness
and cooperation that seems to characterize human social systems.
Symbolic reasoning and communication

It is a common argument that human mental capacities associated with culture
somehow allow humans to transcend the ordinary imperatives of nature. A. R.
Wallace (1905), the co-discoverer of the theory of natural selection, believed that
humans became exempt from its operation. More recently, Marshall Sahlins

(1976a, 1976b) has argued that no adaptive or functional theory can be a complete
explanation of human behavior. In Chapter 8 we described his view of human
behavior: the use of arbitrary symbol systems leads cultural evolution to follow the
internal cultural logic of meaningful systems of fundamentally arbitrary cultural
symbols; humans construct, and impose upon nature, a symbolic order of their own
devising. Natural processes as diverse as gravity and natural selection merely
constrain such constructions, engineering constraints in the case of gravity and the
need to survive and reproduce in the case of natural selection.
The critical issue is not whether humans use meaningful symbol systems but how
the dynamics of the evolution of such systems can come to conflict with functional
imperatives imposed by the decision-making forces and natural selection. The
difficulty is that the evidence that symbolic traits are nonfunctional is not compelling; functional theorists of various colorations can give adaptive explanations for
even the most bizarre cultural traits. The anti-sociobiological cultural materialist
Marvin Harris (1974, 1977, 1979) has been notably inventive in this regard.
Dual inheritance theory is useful here because it shifts attention away from
interpretation of macroscopic patterns of culture to the microscopic mechanisms by
which the properties of symbols might drive cultural evolution in directions irrelevant, or even counter, to adaptive demands. In Chapter 8 we described a microscopic causal mechanism, indirect bias, that can systematically elaborate the subjective meaning of cultural traits, even in the face of selective penalties for doing
so. When a naive individual selects models on the basis of one trait and then
imitates other traits without further bias, the indicator traits on which the bias is

based are immediately indexical in character. The foods people eat signal their
prestige and hence their general suitability as models for traits quite apart from diet.
Once indirect bias is used, even if for perfectly good adaptive reasons, such as using
prestige traits correlated with the possession of superior resource gathering skills to
bias model choice, the resulting evolutionary dynamic is unstable under some
conditions.
The model is formally very similar to models of female choice sexual selection
used by biologists (Lande, 1981). In fact, we were attracted to models of sexual

294

Conclusion

selection for this problem by a certain esthetic resemblance of elaborate male
secondary sexual characters to the similarly elaborate artifacts that are often a part
of cultural symbol systems and by the resemblance of the underlying mechanism
of female choice to indirect bias. In the case of female choice sexual selection,
females are supposed to use display traits of males to choose those males which will
endow offspring with the greatest reproductive success. In the cultural analog,
cultural offspring choose their own cultural parents, but the structure of the situation is otherwise quite similar. Both unstable sexual selection and unstable indirect
bias cause evolution to proceed in orderly but nonfunctional directions. Eventually,
the traits on which the selection of models is based can become quite irrelevant to
ordinary adaptive advantages. Thus indirect bias can explain how arbitrary but
subjectively meaningful cultural symbols evolve from functional indices, as in the
elaborate, highly variable dress and diet markers of prestige.
Again, if this model is a reasonable one, the repetitive and cyclical debates
between functionalist and nonfunctionalist can be brought to the point of an ordinary scientific problem, progressively resolvable by further empirical and theoretical work. Do humans actually make extensive use of indirect bias in cultural
transmission, using arbitrary cultural symbols as the basis of choice? If the answer
is yes, then many symbolic cultural traits may have to be explained as nonadaptive
or maladaptive consequences of runaway or drift-away evolution.
Future Work

We are acutely aware that the dual inheritance model of human evolution rests on
less than completely compelling arguments. The present theoretical machinery and
empirical evidence are insufficient to resolve most of the interesting outstanding
problems. However, we do think that the diversity of plausible models that can be
developed by applying this approach to cultural evolution makes a very strong case
for its utility. The logical duels of twentieth-century social science have sometimes
descended to burlesque imitations of the real thing, fought with much loud invective but rubber swords. Unfortunately, some of the most important and basic
questions have been treated with the lowest comedy. By providing a framework in
which opposing theories can be expressed, dual inheritance theory provides a set
of rules for a sharper, cleaner, more productive logical duel.
If we have done an adequate job in the body of this book, the best directions for
future work will be as clear to our readers as they are to us, far clearer in many
technical areas no doubt. Nevertheless, our own ideas on the point will complete
this, the most important argument we have attempted to make.
Theoretical models

The complexity of the dual inheritance system offers a rich field for formal modeling. Although a respectable amount of analytical work has been done on this
problem by Karlin (1979), Lumsden and Wilson (1980a, 1980b, 1981), Cavalli-

Sforza and Feldman (1981 and references therein), and Cloninger and his colleagues (Cloninger et al., 1979a, 1979b; Rice et al., 1978, 1980), many interesting
questions remain unaddressed. Few sample theories are available to represent

Future Work

295

various processes, and the number of robust theoretical results is small. Especially
important theoretical problems are:
More complex models of biased transmission. Most decisions about whether or not
to adopt a cultural variant may involve the application of several biases, and once
acquired, a cultural trait can act to bias subsequent transmission events. Multiple
biases and chains of biases may have substantially different properties than the
simpler types we have examined. Pulliam and Dunford (1980) have argued that
cognitive consistency, the pleasure felt when a new cultural variant fits well with
a person’s existing repertoire, is an important type of complex bias. These effects
may exemplify only the need to keep decisions simple, or they may permit effective
and complex, but inexpensive, decisions by coupling them to a few primary guiding
criteria. The latter result might enhance the plausibility of the stronger versions of
the sociobiology hypothesis. Can such complex biases operate effectively?
Better models of the evolution of altruism. The scale of human social organization,
we argued in Chapter 7, is hard to explain without group selection. Although
conventional models of general reciprocal altruism in large groups are not a good
alternative to group selection, it is possible that networks of pairwise reciprocal
altruism may have interesting properties. Similarly, hierarchical models with mixtures of reciprocity and exploitation could be a viable alternative to group selection.

Models of age-structured cultural transmission. A considerable amount of recent
empirical work has been devoted to studies of the human life cycle (e.g. Baltes and
Brim,

1979; Elder,

1974; Brim and Kagan,

1980). The acquisition and trans-

mission of culture is distributed throughout the human life cycle; this is one of its
main structural disanalogies with genes. Although we and others have made some
models indirectly based on this phenomenon, the effects of age structure have not
been explicitly investigated. As a cohort ages, the various forces of cultural evolution may cause the frequencies of some traits to change substantially. Changes in
the pattern of intergenerational transmission could have important evolutionary
effects in such a system. For example, changes in the average age at which parents
have children could change the frequency of traits the children acquire. Thus
environmental conditions that affect cohort behavior of the type hypothesized by
Easterlin (1976) and studied by Elder (1974) could have much stronger effects than

would be possible in a genetic system.

Models which incorporate a transmissible environment. Models of cultural transmission show that correlated environments are easily confounded with cultural and
genetic transmission (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1973b, 1978; Eaves et al.,
1978; Cloninger et al., 1979a, 1979b). This problem is especially difficult when

environmental effects have dynamical properties of their own. Examples include
the inheritance of money and artifacts of various kinds, especially the persistence
of expensive capital facilities such as improved agricultural land, transportation

infrastructure, and so forth. Becker (1981) and Schelling (1978) analyze several

models of related processes. Nelson and Winter (1982) have developed an interesting series of models of the evolution of firms in which capital is important as well

296

Conclusion

as the knowledge that conceptually resides in individuals. Understanding the institutional complexity of modern societies will require the mating of a micro-level
theory like the one we have developed here with the more aggregated one of Nelson
and Winter.
1
These effects, or parts of them, fall into the categories of social learning we
carefully excluded from our definition of culture in Chapter 3. Information 1s not
being directly transmitted to the next generation, but environmental modifications
made by one generation do constrain the decisions, or condition the ordinary
learning, of the next. Thus, unlike ordinary environmental effects, they are endogenous to the evolving system of behavior. Almost any cultural explanation for a
given pattern of behavior can be countered by a hypothesis involving transmitted
environment plus individual decisions. For example, underdevelopment can be
explained as a lack of the culturally transmitted skills and attitudes necessary for
industrial production or by consequences of having to compete with the historically
industrial nations whose inheritance of a functioning industrial system (ownership
of capital) gives them advantages quite independently of culture. Probably both
effects play a role in underdevelopment, but it is easy to imagine that either could
be the primary controlling effect. The lack of models in which both are explicitly
included makes even primitive speculation difficult. Such models would mimic
Alexander’s (1979a: 77) version of cultural inertia, and perhaps the Marxist notion
of historical forces.

Empirical studies
Formal theoretical analysis is a useful tool for clarifying logic but an arid exercise
in the absence of well-designed empirical studies. A great deal of the existing
information from the social sciences (and human biology) can be used to guide the
development of dual inheritance theory, as we hope our various illustrative examples have shown. However, there is often no substitute for data collected with the
solution of a particular theoretical problem in mind. Even at the level of sophistication of existing models, such theoretically refined data are necessary right
across the spectrum of the social science disciplines. Micro-level data are needed
to understand the properties of cultural transmission and to make estimates of the
population-level consequences of these properties, especially the strengths of the
various forces imposed on cultural variation. More critical macro-level data on
patterns of variation between cultures and over long spans of time within cultures
are required to estimate what range of basic hypotheses are plausible (and which
hypotheses for which traits in which circumstances). A few examples of experimental and observational studies that we think would be especially useful are as
follows:

Experimental studies of the “laws” of cultural transmission. The evidence reviewed in Chapter 3, we argued, is sufficient to indicate that culture does behave
as an inheritance system, but it is certainly inadequate to answer many questions
about the mechanics of cultural transmission. Is transmission particulat
e, blending,

or multifactorial? Does the analog of genetic linkage exist? That is, when
a naive
person is exposed to several models, and controlling for bias effects,
is there a

Future Work

297

tendency for blocks of traits to be acquired from different models, or are repertoires
assembled independently for each trait? One approach to this problem is to fit
theoretical models to data on family resemblances (e. g. Eaves et al., 1978; Cloninger et al., 1979a, 1979b; Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1982). The difficulty with this

design is that many complex processes interact to produce the observed correlations. As was the case with biological inheritance, the use of experimental
designs to isolate the transmission processes from other sources of variation is a
promising approach. Full scale socialization experiments are, of course, impractical, but the social learning experiments pioneered by Albert Bandura and his
co-workers could be extended to these problems.
Experimental studies of the dynamics of cultural evolution. Jacobs and Campbell
(1961) pioneered the use of multi-“generation” social learning experiments. The
basic design is to start a small laboratory society with a specified culture by the use
of confederates, and then replace the confederates one by one with naive subjects
who use first the confederates, then each other, for models. The change in cultural

traits is measured as a function of “generation.” Jacobs and Campbell used this
design to test the rate of approach to naively preferred judgment on an ambiguous
perception test as a function of personality type (authoritarian versus nonauthoritarian). In our terms, they were measuring the strength of guided variation.
Only a few subsequent studies have used this technique. For example, Insko et
al. (1980, 1982, 1983) used it to test hypotheses about the evolution of social
stratification. Zucker (1977) used it to test the effects of institutionalization on

fidelity of cultural transmission. The hypothesis (confirmed) was that attributing a
position in a formal organization to models caused naive individuals to imitate them
more faithfully. The Insko et al. (1980) study showed a guided variation effect, and
the Zucker study the influence of indirect bias.
This experimental design could be modified so that the effects of all the forces
could be investigated. Selection could be modeled by removing variant individuals
or groups from the experimental population, migration by exchanging individuals
between groups, and random errors by measuring the divergence between replicated groups. The experimenter can also manipulate the environment by giving
individuals or groups tasks to perform, the payoffs of which are manipulated.
Subjects from different cultures or subcultures could be used to investigate the
effects of natural cultural variation on the various forces.

Quantitative field studies. The drawbacks to field studies are the complexity of real
situations and the consequent difficulty of isolating causal factors. Still, the ultimate test of the micro-assumptions and macro-predictions of evolutionary hypotheses must be made using field data. The human case is particularly vexing in this
regard because of the impossibility of conducting field experiments to bridge the
gap between highly artificial laboratory manipulations and natural observations.
However, the range of ethnographic variation in humans is large, and even within
societies the range of variation in such important things as family structure and
educational institutions is commonly quite considerable.
In our opinion, the development of good theoretical tools is the main requirement for making good use of observational data. Without sharply opposed hypoth-

298

Conclusion

eses or key variables to measure, almost any interpretation can be imposed ona
necessarily rather ambiguous set of field data. The recent movement 1n ecological
anthropology to develop and test quantitative models of human foraging behavior
derived from general ecological theory is a promising example (Smith, 1983). The
virtue of the models used, like those from sociobiology applied by Chagnon and
Irons (1979), Irons (1979b), Dickemann

(1981), and others, is that field mea-

surements can be made to support or contradict the models. Alternatives to models
drawn from biology can and should be made similarly specific and applied to field
conditions.
Reasonably sharp field tests of some of the macro-level predictions of the various
models developed here should prove practical. For example, if group selection on
cultural variation is important, it will result in detectable flows of resources outside

networks of kinship and reciprocal altruism. It should make possible reciprocal
relations of mutual trust in situations where cheating or evasion of responsibilities
is easy. In many situations, a detectable fraction of successful “cheaters” ought to

exist. The models also predict a sharp boundary between those insiders suitable for
altruism and trust and outsiders who may be cheated fairly freely (extramural
sanctions aside). The ethnic group data reviewed in Chapter 7 support the group
selection hypothesis, but they are far short of the actual measurement of patterns
of cooperation and conflict. The effect may very well turn out to be weak or absent
in the face of quantitative data.
New types of micro-level field studies are needed to understand the structural
properties of cultural transmission and the action and interactions of forces. The
most difficult problem in such studies is the separation of genetic, cultural, and
correlated environment effects on phenotype. In isolation, conventional psychometric, socialization, and life cycle studies are unlikely to make more than modest
contributions to our understanding of the complex problems we outlined in Chapter
3. In the absence of detailed information about how socialization actually proceeds
in families (and outside of them), one is reduced to highly abstract guesses about
the structure of models, in a situation where many alternatives are equally plausible. For example, it is not possible to judge whether the high correlations between
parents observed for many traits in psychometric and sociometric studies are due
to assortative mating or cultural transmission after marriage (Cavalli-Sforza et al.,
1982). Students of human development have the techniques to assess the putative
pathways of cultural and environmental influences but do not collect the quantitative data on parent-offspring and other resemblances necessary for psychometric
analysis.
A better approach would be to combine psychometric analysis with long-term
longitudinal studies of socialization—cultural trait acquisition and transmission—
throughout the complete life cycle. The most practical design for a study of this
type might be to build a psychometric study around an existing large scale longitudinal study such as that of Werner and Smith (1982). Or, alternatively, longitudinal studies could be initiated on a subset of a sample on which psychometric
data exist, like that of Horn et al. (1979). The advantage of the former strategy is
that good longitudinal studies of humans require many decades to complete and it
would be useful to incorporate existing ones.

Conclusion

299

Quantitative longitudinal studies are also useful to obtain fine-grained data on the
forces that affect cultural variation. Werner and Smith (1982), for example, have

shown how variation in child-rearing practices affects the life chances of economically deprived children on Kawai. However, simple cross-sectional studies of
forces like natural selection and indirect bias would be extremely valuable. The
trade-offs hypothesized in Chapter 6 between genetic and cultural fitness are critically measurable with data only modestly more elaborate than those reviewed.
Does the socialization of professionals lead to reduced norms for family size and
an enhanced opportunity to participate in horizontal and oblique transmission? Can
similar effects be demonstrated in non-Western prestige systems? Similarly, the
dynamics of the spread (or failure) of abstemious religious doctrines in the face of
biases against their practices offer a rich field for the study of a variety of evolutionary forces.
Another important advance would be to measure traits which indicate cultural
“coancestry” in different individuals. Genetic relatedness is a reasonable surrogate
for genetic influences, and is the basis of biometrical models of the patterns of
variation attributable to genetic effects. Comparable indices of cultural “parentage”
are necessary to provide quantitative guides for transmission models. Dialect variation and similar symbolic traits might be used as indices of cultural similarity;
genetic and environmental effects on them are negligible. Such traits would be the
cultural analog of eye color and blood type.
Conclusion

We have taken as our task the construction of simple models for as many of the
basic mechanisms of cultural evolution as we could find suitable detailed suggestions for and for which we could make a plausible empirical case. If these
models collectively represent a reasonably complete theory, albeit a highly
simplified one, they ought to be a useful guide for further exploration. Like a
sixteenth-century map of the world, the scale is small, distortions undoubtedly
exist, some of the processes included are likely to prove apocryphal, and large areas
are blank. The purpose of theory at this juncture is, we believe, to summarize a state
of quite imperfect knowledge about the causes of human behavior in a way which
makes further refinement as simple as possible. The polemicist’s conceit that we
know enough to solve basic questions in this field makes for lively controversies,
but it is misleading if taken too seriously. Too much hard work remains to be done.

q

t!

yt

;

Pine

(ee

OT

'

ii
ve

yw
‘7

=

J,
Ta

*<
7”

~~,

|
~.

1

yaa?

ti

4

4

sy

7

.

¥

hea)
om

mols

Mops

J

;

=

Pieces

nai

ros

Ht

‘ie

aid

Pt

ates “en aia

ihe wong ahs¥
—— 6

ye

:

x edetey ons,

7

oe

ma

AS

ih

References and
Author Index
Bracketed numbers denote page numbers in the present volume on which the works are cited
Ahlstrom, W. M. and R. J. Havighurst. 1971. 400 Losers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. [47]
Alexander, R. D. 1971. The search for an evolutionary philosophy of man. Proc. R. Soc.
Victoria 84: 99-119. [231]
Alexander, R. D. 1974. The evolution of social behavior. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 5: 325-383.

[46, 275]

Alexander, R. D. 1979a. Darwinism and Human Affairs. Seattle: Univ. Washington Press.

[12, 13, 34, 46, 56, 81, 133, 153-160, 200, 202, 231, 275, 296]

Alexander, R. D. 1979b. Evolution and culture. In: Evolutionary Biology and Human Social
Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, N. A. Chagnon and W. Irons, eds., pp.
59-88. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury.

[46, 158]

Alexander, R. D. and D. W. Tinkle. 1968. Review of On Aggression by K. Lorenz and The
Territorial Imperative by R. Ardrey. Bioscience 18: 245-248. [231]
Andrews, D. F., P. J. Pickel, F. R. Hampel, P. J. Huber, W. H. Rogers, and J. W. Tukey.

1972. Robust Estimates of Location: Survey and Advances.

Princeton: Princeton

Univ. Press. [222-223]
Aoki, K. 1982a. Polygenic altruism and extinction group selection. Jap. J. Genet. 57:
297-300. [231]
Aoki, K. 1982b. A condition for group selection to prevail over counteracting individual
selection. Evolution 36: 832—842.

[231]

Arnold, S. 1978. The evolution of a special class of modifiable behaviors in relationship to
environmental pattern. Am. Nat. 112: 415—427.

[93]

Arnold, S. 1981. Behavioral variation in natural populations. I. Phenotypic, genetic and
environmental correlations between chemoreceptive responses to prey in the garter
snake, Thamnophis elegans. Evolution 35: 489-509. [55]
Aronfreed, J. 1969. The problem of imitation. In: Advances in Child Development and
Behavior, L. P. Lipsitt and H. W. Reese, eds., 4: 209-319. [45]

Asch, S. E. 1951. Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of
judgments. In: Groups, Leadership and Men, H. Guetzkow, ed., pp. 177-190.
Pittsburgh: Carnegie. [224]
Atkinson, R. C., G. H. Bower, and E. J. Crothers. 1965. An Introduction to Mathematical

Learning Theory. New York: Wiley. [84, 85]
Axelrod, R. 1980. Effective choice in the prisoner’s dilemma. J. Conflict Resolution 24:

3-25. [230]
Axelrod, R. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books. [230]
Axelrod, R. and W. D. Hamilton. 1981. The evolution of cooperation. Science 211:

1390-1396. [230]
Bachman, J. G. 1970. Youth in Transition. Vol. 2. The Impacts of Family Background and
Intelligence on Tenth Grade Boys. Ann Arbor: Survey Research Center, Univ.
Michigan. [50]

301

302

References and Author Index

Bachman, J. G., J. M. O’Malley, and J. Johnston.

1978. Youth in Transition.

Vol. 6.

Adolescent to Adulthood—Change and Stability in the Lives of Young Men. Ann

Arbor: Survey Research Center, Univ. Michigan. [50]
Bacon, M. K., I. L. Child, and H. Barry III. 1963. A cross-cultural study of correlates of
crime. J. Abn. Soc. Psychol. 66: 291-300. [47]
Baldwin, J. D. and J. I. Baldwin. 1981. Beyond Sociobiology. New York: Elsevier. [158]

Baltes, P. B. and O. G. Brim. 1979. Life Span and Behavior. New York: Academic Press.
295
ethics x 1977. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. [42, 43,
PEE IRM!
Bandura, A., DiRoss, and S. A. Ross. 1963. A comparative test of the status envy, social
power, and the secondary reinforcement theories of identificatory learning. J. Abn.
Soc. Psychol. 67: 527-534. [44, 244]
Bandura, A. and R. Walters. 1963. Social Learning and Personality Development. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. [38, 41]
Bannister, R. 1979. Social Darwinism: Science and Myth in Anglo-American
Thought. Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press. [281]

Social

Barker, L. M., M. R. Best, and M. L. Domjon, eds. 1977. Learning Mechanisms in Food
Selection. Waco, Tex.: Baylor Univ. Press. [86]

Barnett, S. A. 1975. The Rat:A Study in Behavior. Rev. ed. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.

[86]

Bascom, W. R. 1948. Ponapae prestige economy. Southwestern J. Anthropol. 4: 211-221.
[269-270]
Basso, K. H. and H. A. Selby. 1976. Meaning in Anthropology. Albuquerque: Univ. New
Mexico Press. [272]
Baumrind, D. 1967. Child care practices anteceding three patterns of preschool behavior.
Genet. Psychol. Monogr. 75: 43-83. [46, 47]
Becker, G. S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.

(241, 295]
Bell, A. P. 1969. Role modeling of fathers in adolescence and young adulthood. J. Counseling Psychol. 16: 30-35. [53, 54]
Bell, G. D. 1963. Processes in the formation of adolescents’ aspirations. Social Forces 42:

179-186. [54]
Berry, J. W. 1976. Human Ecology and Cognitive Style: Comparative Studies in Cultural
and Psychological Style. New York: Wiley. [179-180]
Blau, P. M. 1965. The flow of occupational supply and recruitment. Am. Sociol. Rev. 30:
475-490. [39, 50]
Block, J. H. 1973. Conceptions of sex role: Some cross-cultural and longitudinal perspectives. Am. Psychol. 28: 512-526. [50]
Boas, F. 1940 (1966). Race, Language and Culture. Paperback ed. New York: Free Press.
[132]
Boehm, C. 1978. Rational pre-selection from Hamadryas to Homo sapiens: The place of
decisions in adaptive process. Am. Anthropol. 80: 265-296. [4, 132, 158]
Bonner, J. T. 1980. The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
(81, 82, 83, 130]
Boorman, S. A. and P. R. Levitt. 1980. The Genetics of Altruism. New York: Academic
ressea Zain
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson. 1982. Cultural transmission and the evolution of cooperative

behavior. Hum. Ecol. 10: 325-351. [235]
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson. 1983. The cultural transmission of acquired variation: Effects
on genetic fitness. J. Theoret. Biol. 100: 567-596. [113]
Boyle, R. P. 1966. The effects of the high school on student’s aspirations. Am. J. Sociol.
71: 628-639. [54]
Bradshaw, A. D. 1965. Evolutionary significance of phenotypic plasticity in plants.
Adv.
Genet. 13: 115-155. New York: Academic Press. [4, 83]
Brent, foe Charles Darwin: A Man of Enlarged C uriosity. New York: Harper
& Row.

References and Author Index

303

Brim, O. G. 1958. Family structure and sex role learning by children: A further analysis
of Helen Koch’s data. Sociometry 21: 1-16. [54]
Brim, O. G. and J. Kagan, eds. 1980. Constancy and Change in Human Development.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [295]

Brittain, C. V. 1963. Adolescent choices and parent-peer cross-pressures. Am. Sociol. Rev.

28: 385-391. [54]
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1970. Two Worlds of Childhood: U.S. and U.S.S.R. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.

[54]

Brown, G. B. 1910. Melanesians and Polynesians: Their Life Histories Compared. London: Macmillan. [270]
pe pe . M. 1968. The Demand and Supply of Public Goods. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Bulmer, M. G. 1980. The Mathematical Theory of Quantitative Genetics. Oxford: Clarendon. [121]
Burley, N. 1979. The evolution of concealed ovulation. Am. Nat. 114: 835—858. [199]
Bush, hae and F. Mosteller. 1955. Stochastic Models for Learning. New York: Wiley.

, 84]

Caldwell, J. C. 1976. Toward a restatement of demographic transition theory. Pop. Dev.
Rev. 2: 321-366. [201-202]
Campbell, D. T. 1960. Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other
knowledge processes. Psychol. Rev. 67: 380-400. [132]
Campbell, D. T. 1965. Variation and selective retention in sociocultural evolution.

In:

Social Change in Developing Areas: A Reinterpretation of Evolutionary Theory, H.
R. Barringer, G. I. Blanksten, and R. W. Mack, eds., pp. 19-49. Cambridge,
Mass.: Schenkman.

[11, 290]

Campbell, D. T. 1975. On the conflicts between biological and social evolution and between
psychology and moral tradition. Am. Psychol. 30: 1103-1126. [11, 197, 205, 276,
290]
Cattel, R. B. 1960. The multiple abstract variance analysis equations and solutions: For
nature-nurture research on continuous variables. Psychol. Rev. 67: 353-372. [52]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman. 1973a. Models for cultural inheritance. I. Group
mean and within group variation. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 4: 42-55. [69]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman.

1973b. Cultural versus biological inheritance:

Phenotypic transmission from parents to children (A theory of the effect of parental
phenotypes on children’s phenotypes). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 25: 618-637. [51, 295]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman. 1978. The evolution of continuous variation. III.

Joint transmission of genotypes, phenotypes and environment. Genetics 90:
391-425. [52, 295]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
Quantitative Approach. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. [8, 9, 31, 50, 51, 65, 69,

132, 174, 267, 294]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman. 1983. Cultural versus genetic adaptation. Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80: 4993-4996. [117]
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., M. W. Feldman, K. H. Chen, and S. M. Dornbusch. 1982. Theory
and observation in cultural transmission. Science 218: 19-27. [50, 297, 298]

Chaffee, S. H. 1972. Television and adolescent aggressiveness (overview). In: Television
and Social Behavior, Vol. 3, G. A. Comstock and E. A. Rubinstein, eds. Surgeon
General’s Scientific Advisory Committee on Television and Social Behavior. Washington, D.C.: Govt. Printing Office, pp. 1-34. [54]
Chagnon, N. A. and W. Irons, eds. 1979. Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury. [12, 298]
Chen, K-H., L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, and M. W. Feldman. 1982. A study of cultural transan
sabi
mission in Taiwan. Hum. Ecol. 10: 365-382. [50]

Cheverud, J. 1982. Phenotypic, genetic and environmental morphological integration in the

cranium. Evolution 36: 499-516. [55]
Chomsky, N. 1976. On the nature of language. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 280: 46-57. [45]
Cloninger, C. R., J. Rice, and T. Reich. 1979a. Multifactorial inheritance with cultural

304

References and Author Index

transmission and assortative mating. II. A general model of combined polygenic and

cultural inheritance. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 176-198. [51, 294, 295, 297)
Cloninger, C. R., J. Rice, and T. Reich. 1979b. Multifactorial inheritance with cultural

transmission and assortative mating. III. Family structure and the analysis of sepa-

ration experiments. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 366-388.

[51, 294, 295, 297]

Cohen, A. 1974. Two-Dimensional Man: An Essay on the Anthropology of Power and
Symbolism in Complex Society. Berkeley: Univ. California Press. [274]
Coopersmith, S. 1967. The Antecendents of Self-Esteem. San Francisco: Freeman. [50]
Crow, J. F. and K. Aoki. 1982. Group selection for a polygenic behavioral trait: A
differential proliferation model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79: 2628-2631. [231]
Cyert, R. M. and J. G. March. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall. [93, 94]
Darlington, C. D. 1969. The Evolution of Man and Society. New York: Simon & Schuster.
159
RAatt (ce Ke (1974). The Notebooks on Man, Mind, and Materialism. Transcribed and
annotated by P. H. Barrett. In: H. E. Gruber, Darwin on Man: A Psychological Study
of Scientific Creativity. New York: Dutton, pp. 263-381. [1]
Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: Murray.

[19]

Darwin, C. 1872. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. London: Murray.

[19]

Darwin, C. 1874 (1885). The Descent of Man and Selection According to Sex. 2d ed.
London: Murray. [19, 82, 172]
Dawkins, R. 1976. The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. [37]
Day, R. H. 1967. Profits, learning, and convergence of satisficing to marginalism. Q. J.
Econ. 81: 302-311. [94]
Day, R. H., S. Morely, and K. Smith. 1974. Myopic maximizing and rules of thumb in a
micro economic model of industrial growth. Am. Econ. Rev. 64: 11-23. [94]
Diamond, J. 1978. The Tasmanians: The longest isolation, the simplest technology. Nature
273: 185-186. [9]
Dickemann, M. 1979. Female infanticide, reproductive strategies and social stratification:

A preliminary model. In: Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An
Anthropological Perspective, N. Chagnon and W. Irons, eds., pp. 321-367. North
Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury. [276]

Dickemann, M. 1981. Paternal confidence and dowry competition: A biocultural analysis
of Purdah. In: Natural Selection and Social Behavior: Recent Research and New
Theory, R. D. Alexander and D. W. Tinkle, eds., pp. 417—438. Oxford: Blackwell.
[298]
Duncan, O. D. 1965. The trend of occupational mobility in the United States. Am. Sociol.
Rev. 30: 491-498. [50]
Durham, W. H. 1976. The adaptive significance of cultural behavior. Hum. Ecol. 4:
89-121. [132, 153, 158, 159, 190, 274]
Durham, W. H. 1977. Reply. In: E. E. Ruyle, F. T. Cloak, L. B. Slobodkin, and W. H.
Durham, The adaptive significance of cultural behavior: Comments and reply. Hum.
Ecol. 5: 49-67. [159, 162]
Durham, W. H. 1978. Toward a coevolutionary view of human biology and culture. In: The
Sociobiology Debate, A. Caplan, ed., pp. 428-448. New York: Harper & Row. [13,
1597162, 163]
Durham, W. H. 1979. Toward a coevolution theory of human biology and culture. In:
Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective,
hei Chagnon and W. Irons, eds., pp. 39-59. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury.

Durham, W. H. 1982. Interactions of genetic and cultural evolution: Models and examples.
Hum. Ecol. 10: 289-323. [159, 162]
Durkheim, E. 1895 (1938). The Rules of the Sociological Method.

Glencoe: Free Press. [23]

Easterlin, R. A. 1976. The conflict between aspirations and resources. Pop. Dev. Rev. 2:
417-425. [295]

References and Author Index

305

Eaves, L. J., K. A. Last, P. A. Young, and N. G. Martin. 1978. Model-fitting
approaches
to the analysis of human behavior. Heredity 41: 249-320.

[51, 295, 297]

Edgerton, R. B. with W. Goldschmidt. 1971. The Individual in Cultural Adaptation
: A
Study of Four East African Peoples. Berkeley: Univ. California Press, {57-59, 161]
Einhorn, H. J. and R. M. Hogarth. 1981. Behavioral decision theory: Processes of
judgment
and choice. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 32: 53-88. [168, 169]
Eiseley, L. C. 1958. Darwin’s Century. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor. [75]
Eiseley, L. C. 1973. The Man Who Saw through Time. New York: Scribner. [81]
Elder, G. 1974. Children of the Great Depression: Social Change and Life Experience.
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. [295]
Engelberg, J. and L. L. Boyarsky. 1979. The noncybernetic nature of ecosystems. Am. Nat.
114: 317-324. [35]
Epstein, T. S. 1968. Capitalism, Primitive and Modern: Some Aspects of Tolai Economic
Growth. Manchester: Manchester Univ. Press. [60]

Ervin-Tripp, S. 1976. Speech acts and social learning. In: Meaning in Anthropology, K. H.
een and H. A. Selby, eds., pp. 123-153. Albuquerque: Univ. New Mexico Press.

73]

Eshel, I. 1972. On the neighborhood effect and the evolution of altruistic traits. Theoret.

Pop. Biol. 3: 258-277. [231]

Falconer, D. S. 1960. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. New York: Ronald. BAG!

Feldman, M. W. and R. C. Lewontin. 1975. The heritability hangup. Science 190:
1163-1168. [51]
Finney, B. R. 1972. Big-men, half-men, and trader-chiefs: Entrepreneurial styles in New
Guinea and Polynesia. In: Opportunity and Response: Case Studies in Economic
Development, T. S. Epstein and D. H. Penny, eds., pp. 114-261. London: Hurst.

[60]

Fisher, R. A. 1918. The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian
inheritance. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh 52: 399-433. [75, 173]
Fisher, R. A. 1958. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Rev. ed. New York: Dover.

(72, 75, 243, 259]
Fishman, J. A. 1972. The Sociology of Language: An Interdisciplinary Social Science
Approach to Language in Society. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury House. [246]
Flacks, R. 1967. The liberated generation: An exploration of the roots of student protest.
J. Social Issues 23: 52-75. [50]

Flinn, M. V. and R. D. Alexander. 1982. Culture theory: The developing synthesis from
biology. Hum. Ecol. 10: 383-400. [230, 243, 257, 287]
Freedman, R. 1979. Theories of fertility decline: A reappraisal. In: World Population and
Development: Challenges and Prospects, P. M. Hauser, ed., pp. 63-79. New York:
Syracuse Univ. Press. [201-202]
Freilich, M. 1980. Smart-sex and proper-sex: A paradigm found. Central Issues Anthropol.
2: 37-51. [37, 276]
Fuller, J. L. and R. W. Thompson. 1960. Behavior Genetics. New York: Wiley. [52]
Fuller, J. L. and R. W. Thompson. 1978. Foundations of Behavior Genetics. St. Louis:
Mosby. [52]
Galef, B. G. J. 1976. Social transmission of acquired behavior: A discussion of tradition
and social learning in vertebrates. Adv. Study of Behavior 6: 77-100. [34, 82, 130]

Galef, B. G. J. 1980. Diving for food: Analysis of a possible case of social learning by wild
rats (Rattus norwegicus). J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 94: 416-425. [39]
Garcia, J., F. R. Ervin, and R. Koelling. 1966. Learning with prolonged delay of reinforcement. Psychonam. Sci. 5: 121-122. [84, 86]
Geertz, C. 1972. Deep play: Notes on the Balinese cockfight. Daedalus 101: 1-37. [37]
Geertz, C. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books. [36, 281]
Gewirtz, J. L. 1971. Conditional responding as a paradigm for observational, imitative
learning and vicarious reinforcement. In: Advances in Child Development and Behavior, H. W. Reese, ed., 6: 273-304. New York: Academic Press. [46]
Gewirtz, J. L. and K. G. Stingle. 1968. Learning of generalized imitation as a basis for
identification. Psychol. Rev. 75: 374-397. [42]

306

References and Author Index

Ghiselin, M. T. 1969. The Triumph of the Darwinian Method. Berkeley: Univ. California
Press. [172

Gifford, E. “ Bas Tongan Society. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Bulletin 61. [270]

Gillespie, J. H. 1981a. The role of migration in the genetic structure of populations in
temporally and spatially varying environments. III. Migration modification. Am.
Nat. 117: 223-233. [112]
Gillespie, J. H. 1981b. Mutation modification in a random environment. Evolution 35:
468-476. [112]
f
Glass, D. V. and J. R. Hall. 1954. Social mobility in Great Britain: A study of intergeneration changes in status. In: Social Mobility in Great Britain, D. V. Glass, ed.,
pp. 177-217. Glencoe: Free Press. [39, 50]

Goode, W. J. 1978. The Celebration of Heros: Prestige as a Control System. Berkeley:
Univ. California Press. [241, 276]

Goodenough, W. H. 1957. Cultural anthropology and linguistics. In: Report of the Seventh
Annual Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and Language Study, P. Garim, ed.
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown Univ. Monogr. Ser. Lang. and Ling. 9: 167-173.
[33537]
Goodenough, W. H. 1981. Culture; Language, and Society. McCaleb Module in Anthropology. Menlo Park, Calif.: Benjamin/Cummings. [37]
Gould, S. J. 1982. Darwinism and the expansion of evolutionary theory. Science 216:
380-387. [290]
Gould, S. J. and R. C. Lewontin. 1979. The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian
paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proc. R. Soc. London B205:
581-598. [3, 13, 282]
Greeley, A. M. and W. C. McCready. 1975. The transmission of cultural heritages: The
case of the Irish and Italians. In: Ethnicity: Theory and Experience, N. Glazer and
D. P. Moynihan, eds., pp. 209-235. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [59]
Greene, P. J. 1978. Promiscuity, paternity, and culture. Am. Ethnol. 5: 151-159. [13, 202]
Gruber, H. E. with P. H. Barrett. 1974. Darwin on Man: A Psychological Study of Scientific
Creativity. New York: Dutton. [1, 19]
Hadley, G. 1967. Introduction to Probability and Statistical Decision Theory. San Fran-

cisco: Holden-Day. [87]
Hagman, E. R. 1932. A study of fears of children of pre-school age. J. Exp. Educ. 1:
110-130. [50]
Hagoromo Society. Kamikaze Divine Thunderbolt Corps Survivors. 1973. Born to Die: The
Cherry Blossom Squadrons. Los Angeles: Ohara. [204]
Haldane, J. B. S. and S. D. Jayakar. 1963. Polymorphism due to selection of varying
direction. J. Genet. 58: 237-242. [112]
Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior I, I. J. Theoret. Biol.

7: 1-52. [202]
Hamilton, W. D. 1967. Extraordinary sex ratios. Science 156: 477—488. [286]
Hamilton, W. D. 1972. Altruism and related phenomena, mainly in the social insects. Ann.

Rev. Ecol. Syst. 3: 193-232. [16]
Hamilton, W. D. 1975. Innate social aptitudes of man: An approach from evolutionary
genetics. In: Biosocial Anthropology, R. Fox, ed., pp. 133-155. London: Malaby.

(23152751

Handy, E. S. G. and W. C. Handy. 1924. Samoan House Building, Canoeing, and
Tattooing. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Bulletin 15. [270-271]
aa
e 1922. Tattooing in the Marquesas. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Bulletin 1.

—271]

Hardin, R. 1982. Collective Action. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. [229, 241]
Harlow, H. F. and M. K. Harlow. 1969. Effects of various mother-infant relationships on
thesus monkey behaviors. In: Determinants of Infant Behavior, Vol. 4, B. M. Foss,
ed. London: Methuen. [35]

Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York: Crowell. [281]
Harris, M. 1971. Culture, Man and Nature. New York: Crowell. [33, 36]
Harris, M. 1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches: The Riddles of Culture. New York:
Random House. [293]

References and Author Index

307

Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random
House. [293]
Harris, M. 1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle
for a Science of Culture. New York:
Random House. [132, 158, 281, 293]
Hartung, J. 1976. On natural selection and the inheritance of wealth. Curr. Anthropol. 17:
607-622. [202]
Hartup, W. W. 1970. Peer interaction and social organization. In: Carmichael’ sManual of
Child Psychology, P. H. Mussen, ed., 3d ed., 2: 361-456. [54]
Hartup, W. W. and B. Coates. 1967. Imitation of a peer as a function of reinforcement from
the peer group and rewardingness of the model. Child Dev. 38: 1003-1016. [54]
Henderson, N. D. 1982. Human behavior genetics. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 33: 403—440.

[39,

aisro2]
Hetherington, E. M. 1972. Effects of father absence on personality development in adolescent daughters. Dev. Psychol. 7: 313-326.

[47]

Hill, R. C. and F. P. Stafford. 1974. Allocation of time to preschool children and educational opportunity. J. Hum. Res. 9: 323-341. [200]
Hiroa, T. R. 1930. Samoan Material Culture. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Bulletin 75.
[270-271]
Hiroa, T. R. 1938. Ethnology of Mangareva. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Bulletin 157.
[270-271]
Hirshleifer, J. 1977. Economics from a biological viewpoint. J. Law Econ. 20: 1-52. [242]
Hirshleifer, J. and J. Riley. 1979. The analytics of uncertainty and information—an expository survey. J. Econ. Lit. 17: 1375-1421.

[83]

Hirshleifer, J. 1983. From the weakest link to the best shot: The voluntary provision of
public goods. Public Interest 41: 371-386. [229]
Hoffman, M. L. 1971. Father absence and conscience development. Dev. Psychol. 4:
400-406. [47]
Hoffman, M. L. and H. D. Saltzstein. 1967. Parent discipline and the child’s moral
development. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 5: 45-57. [47]
Horn, J. M., Y. C. Loehlin, and L. Willerman. 1979. Intellectual resemblance among
adoptive and biological relatives: The Texas adoption project. Behav. Genet. 9:
177-207. [298]
Houston, A. and J. McNamara. 1981. How to maximize reward rate on two variable interval
paradigms. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 35: 367-396. [93]
Hudson, E. A. and D. W. Jorgenson. 1974. U.S. energy policy and economic growth,
1975-2000. Bell J. Econ. Mgmt. Sci. 4: 461-514. [24]
Immelman, K. 1975. Ecological significance of imprinting and early learning. Ann. Rev.
Ecol. Syst. 6: 15-37. [82, 130]
Inkeles, A. and D. H. Smith. 1974. Becoming Modern: Individual Change in Six Developing Countries. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [54]
Insko, C. A., R. Gilmore, S. Drenan, A. Lipsitz, D. Moehle, and J. Thibaut. 1983. Trade

versus expropriation in open groups: A comparison of two types of social power. J.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. 44: 977-999. [297]
Insko, C. A., R. Gilmore, D. Moehle, A. Lipsitz, S. Drenan, and J. W. Thibaut.

1982.

Seniority in the generational transition of laboratory groups: The effects of social
familiarity and task experience. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 18: 577-580. [297]

Insko, C. A., J. W. Thibaut, D. Moehle, M. Wilson, W. D. Diamond, R. Gilmore, M. R.

Soloman, and A. Lipsitz. 1980. Social evolution and the emergence of leadership.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 39 (3): 431-448. [297]

Irons, W.

1979a.

Natural

selection,

adaptation,

and human

social behavior.

In: Evo-

lutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, N.
Chagnon and W. Irons, eds., pp. 4-39. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury. [13, 153]
Irons, W. 1979b. Cultural and biological success. In: Evolutionary Biology and Human
Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, N. Chagnon and W. Irons, eds.,
pp. 257-272. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury. [258, 276, 281, 298)

l
Isaac, G. L. 1976. States of cultural elaboration in the Pleistocene: Possible archeologica

indicators of the development of language capabilities. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 280:
275-288. [36, 60]

308

References and Author Index

tradition through
Jacobs, R. C. and D. T. Campbell. 1961. The perpetuation of an arbitrary
62: 649-658.
Psychol.
Soc.
Abn.
J.
ure.
several generations of laboratory microcult
,
,
,
(225-227 297]
explanation.
Jain, A. K. 1981. The effect of female education on fertility: A simple
Demography 18: 577-594. [201]
Word and
Jakobson, R. 1971. Quest for the essence of language. In: Selected Writings U1.
Language. R. Jakobson, ed. The Hague: Mouton.

[272]

hy
Janssen, S. G. and R. M. Hauser. 1981. Religion, socialization and fertility. Demograp
18: 511-528. [176]

and S.
Jencks, C., M. Smith, H. Acland, M. J. Bane, D. Cohen, H.’Gintis, B. Heyns,

Michelson. 1972. Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling
in America. New York: Basic Books. [180]
Jenkin, F. 1864. The origin of species. N. Br. Rev. A6: 277-318. [75]
Jensen, G. F. and M. L. Erickson. 1979. The religious factor and deliquency: Another look
at the Hellfire hypotheses. In: The Religious Dimension: New Directions in Quantitative Research,

R. Wuthnow,

ed., pp. 157-177.

New

York: Academic

Press.

[177]
Jessor, R. and S. L. Jessor. 1977. Problem Behavior and Psychosocial Development: A
Longitudinal Study of Youth. New York: Academic Press. [50]
Kalat, J. W. and P. Rozin. 1972. You can lead a rat to poison, but you can’t make him think.
In: Biological Boundaries of Learning, M. E. P. Seligman and J. L. Hagar, eds., pp.
115-122. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. [87]

Karlin, S. 1979. Models of multifactorial inheritance. I. Multivariate formulations and basic

convergence results. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 15: 308-355. [1256, 294]
Karlin, S. 1980. Models of multifactorial inheritance. V. Linear assortative mating as
against selective (nonlinear) assortative mating. Thearet. Pop. Biol. 17: 255-275.

[51]

Karlin, S. and

J. M. McGregor. 1974. Towards a theory of the evolution of modifier genes.

Theoret. Pop. Biol. 5: 59-103. [112]

Katz, S. H. and J. Schall. 1979. Fava bean consumption and biocultural evolution. Med.
Anthropol. 3: 459-476. [177-178]
Katz, S. H., M. L. Hediger, and L. A. Valleroy. 1974. Traditional maize processing
techniques in the New World. Science 184: 765-773. [153]
Kawai, M. 1965. Newly acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop of Japanese
monkeys on Koshima Islet. Primates 6: 1-30. [35]
Keesing, R. M. 1974. Theories of culture. Ann. Rev. Anthropol. 3: 73-97. [33]
Keisler, C. A. and S. B. Keisler. 1969. Conformity. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. [10,
223-224]
Kimura. M. 1965. A stochastic model concerning the maintenance of genetic variability in
quantitative characters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 54: 731-736.

[75]

King, J. A. 1951. Social behavior, social organization, and population dynamics in a
black-tailed prairiedog town in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Ph.D. thesis, Univ.
Michigan. [35]
King, J. A. 1959. The social behavior of prairie dogs. Sci. Am. 201: 128-140.

[35]

Kirkpatrick, C. 1936. A comparison of generations in regard to attitudes toward feminism.
J. Gen. Psychol. 49: 343-361.

pas

ers eye

[50]

Sexual selection and the evolution of female choice. Evolution 36:

Klaus, R. A. and S. W. Gray. 1968. The early training project for disadvantaged children:
A report after five years. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 33(4): 1-66. [54]

Kobasigawa, A. 1968. Inhibitory and disinhibitory effects of models on sex-inappropriate
behavior in children. Psychologia 11: 86—96. [54]
Koestler, A. 1971. The Case of the Midwife Toad. New York: Random House. [172]
Kohlberg, L. 1964. Development of moral character and moral ideology. In: Review of

Child Development Research, Vol. 1, M. L. Hoffman and L. W. Hoffman, eds., pp.

383-431. New York: Russell Sage. [45]

References and Author Index

309

Kohn, M. L. 1981. Personality, occupation, and social stratification: A frame of reference.
In: Research in Social Stratification, Vol. 3, D. Y. Treiman and R. V. Robinson,
eds., pp. 267-297. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press. [179]

Krebs, C. 1978. Optimal foraging: Decision rules for predators. In: Behavioral Ecology, J.
R. Krebs and N. B. Davies, eds., pp. 23-64. London: Blackwell Scientific. [93]
Krebs, J. R. and N. B. Davies. 1981. An Introduction to Behavioral Ecology. Sunderland,
Mass.: Sinauer. [13]
Kroeber, A. L. and C. Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture, a critical review of the concepts and
definitions. Papers Peabody Mus. Am. Archeol. Ethnol. 47(1): 1-223 [33-38]
Kurland, J. A. 1979. Paternity, mother’s brother, and human sociality. In: Evolutionary

Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, N. A. Chagnon and W. G. Irons, eds., pp. 145—180. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury. [13, 202]
Labov, W.

1972. Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: Univ. Pennsylvania Press. [54,

246-247, 261, 273]
Labov, W. 1980. The social origins of sound change. In: Locating Language in Time and
Space, W. Labov, ed., pp. 251-265. New York: Academic Press. [246]

Lande, R. 1976. The maintenance of genetic variability by mutation in a polygenic character
with linked loci. Genet. Res. 26: 221-235. [75, 121]
Lande, R. 1977. The influence of mating system on the maintenance of genetic variability
in polygenic characters. Genetics 86: 485-498. [121]
Lande, R. 1979. Quantitative genetic analysis of multi-variable evolution, applied to brain,
body size allometry. Evolution 53: 402—416. (121, 173, 256]
Lande, R. 1980. The genetic covariance between characters maintained by pleiotropic
mutations. Genetics 94: 203-215. [121]
Lande, R. 1981. Models of speciation by sexual selection on polygenic traits. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 78: 3721-3725. [260, 293]
Landy, D. and H. Sigall. 1974. Beauty is talent: Task evaluation as a function of
performer’s physical attractiveness. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 29: 299-304. [244]
Larson, L. E. 1974. An examination of the salience hierarchy during adolescence: The
influence of the family. Adolescence 35: 317-332. [54]

Laughlin, C. D., Jr., and E. G. d’Aquili. 1974. Biogenetic Structuralism. New York:
Columbia Univ. Press. [45]
Layzer, D. 1974. Heritability analyses of I.Q. scores: Science or numerology? Science 183:
1259-1266. [51]
Lesser, G. S. and D. Kandel. 1969. Parent-adolescent relationships and adolescence in the
United States and Denmark. J. Marriage and the Family 31: 348-358. [47]
Levin, B. R. and W. L. Kilmer. 1974. Interdemic selection and the evolution of altruism:
A computer simulation study. Evolution 28: §27-545. [2311
LeVine, R. A. 1966. Dreams and Deeds: Achievement Motivation in Nigeria. Chicago:
Univ. Chicago Press. [59, 201]
LeVine, R. A. 1973. Culture, Behavior, and Personality. Chicago: Aldine. [41, 162]
LeVine, R. A. and D. T. Campbell. 1972. Ethnocentrism: Theories of Conflict, Ethnic

Attitudes, and Group Behavior. New York: Wiley. [238-239]
Levins, R. 1966. The strategy of model building in population biology. Am. Sci. 54:
421-31. [25]
Levins, R. 1968. Evolution in Changing Environments: Some Theoretical Explorations.
Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. [25]
Lewontin, R. C. 1974. The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change. New York: Columbia
:
Univ. Press. [3, 5]
Liebenstein, H. 1976. Beyond Economic Man: A New F oundation for Microeconomics.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [24]

of
Lieberman, P. 1975. On the Origins of Language: An Introduction to the Evolution
Human Speech. New York: Macmillan.

(24, 36]

Linton, R. 1939..Marquesan culture. In: The Individual and His Society: The Psychodynamics of Primitive Social Organization, A. Kardiner, ed., pp. 138-196. New
York: Columbia Univ. Press. [270]

310

References and Author Index

Lipset, S. M. and R. Bendix. 1964. Social Mobility in Industrial Society. Berkeley: Univ.
ia

California Press. [50]

Lumsden, C. and E. O. Wilson. 1980a. Translation of epigenetic rules of individual
behavior into ethnographic patterns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77: 6248-6250.

;

[206, 294]

se

Lumsden, C. and E. O. Wilson. 1980b. Gene-culture translation in the avoidance of sibling
incest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77: 4382-4386. [294]

Lumsden, C. and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Mind, and Culture. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Univ. Press. [10, 37, 46, 69, 131, 132, 153-166, 177, 190, 212, 294]
Lynn, D. B. 1974. The Father: His Role in Child Development. Monterey, Calif.:
Brooks/Cole. [47]
Lynn, D. B. 1979. Daughters and Parents: Past, Present and Future. Monterey, Calif.:
Brooks/Cole. [47]
Maccoby, E. E. 1980. Social Development: Psychological Growth and the Parent-Child
Relationship. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

[47]

Maccoby, E. E. and C. N. Jacklin. 1974. The Psychology of Sex Differences. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press. [47]
Mainardi, D. 1980. Tradition and social transmission of behavior in animals. In: Socio-

biology: Beyond Nature-Nurture? G. Barlow and J. Silverberg, eds., pp. 227—255.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

[82, 130]

Marshack, A. 1976. Implications of the paleolithic symbolic evidence for the origin of
language. Am. Sci. 64: 136-145. [36]
Mason, K. O. and V. T. Palan. 1981. Female employment and fertility in peninsular
Malaysia: The maternal incompatibility hypothesis reconsidered. Demography 18:
549-575. [201]
Masters, R. 1973. Functional approaches to analogical comparison between species. Soc.
Sci. Inform. 12(4): 7-28. [31]

Matessi, C. and S. D. Jayakar.

1976. Conditions for the evolution of altruism under

Darwinian selection. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 9: 360-387. [231]
Maynard Smith, J. 1976. Group selection. Q. Rev. Biol. 51: 277-283.

[231]
Maynard Smith, J. 1978. Optimality theory in evolution. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 9: 31-56.

[61]
Maynard Smith, J. and N. Warren. 1982. Models of cultural and genetic change. Evolution
36: 620-627. [164]
McCall, R. B. 1977. Childhood I.Q.’s as predictors of adult education and occupational
status. Science 197: 482—483.

[50]

McEvoy, L. and G. Land. 1981. Life-style and death patterns of Missouri RLDS Church
members. Am. J. Public Health 71: 1350-1357. [176-177]
McNamara, J. and A. Houston. 1980. The application of statistical decision theory to
animal behavior. J. Theoret. Biol. 85: 673-690. [93]
Michod, R. E. 1982. The theory of kin selection. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 13: 23-56. [231]
Milgram, S. 1965. Some conditions of obedience and disobedience to authority. Hum. Rel.
18: 57-76. [38]
Miller, N. E. and J. Dollard. 1941. Social Learning and Imitation. New Haven: Yale Univ.
Press. [42]
caese eng Divine Thunder: The Life and Death of the Kamikazes. New York: McCall.
04
eae aee 1960. Learning Theory and the Symbolic Processes. New York: Wiley.

[4

.

Mussen, P. H., J. J. Conger, and J. Kagan. 1979. Child Development and Personality. Sth
ed. New York: Harper & Row.

[46, 47]

Nelson, R. R. and S. G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [295-296]
Newcomb, T. and G, Svehla. 1937. Intra-familial relationships in attitude. Sociometry 1:
180-205. [50, 52]
Nisbett, R. and L. Ross. 1980. Human Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social
Judgment. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. [38, 93, 168-170]

References and Author Index

311

Nisbett, R. E. and T. D. Wilson. 1977. Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports of
mental process. Psychol. Rev. 84: 231-259. [38]

Norberini, M. 1966. Ethnocentrism and feuding: A cross-cultural study. M.A. thesis, Univ.
Chicago. [238]
Nuttin, J. M., Jr. 1975. The Illusion of Attitude Change: Towards a Response Contagion
Theory of Persuasion. London: Academic Press. [38]

Oliver, S. C. 1962. Ecology and cultural continuity as contributing factors in the social
ngs

of the Plains Indians. Univ. California Publ. Archaeol. Ethnol. 48(1):

—90. [57]
Olson, M. 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [228]
Opie, I. and P. Opie. 1959. The Lore and Language of Children. Oxford: Clarendon. [54]
Opie, I. and P. Opie. 1969. Children’s Games in Street and Playground. London: Oxford
Univ. Press. [54]

Opie, I. and P. Opie. 1976. Street games: Counting out and chasing. In: Play—Its Role in
Development and Evolution, J. S. Bruner, A. Jolly, and K. Sylva, eds., pp.
394—412.

London: Penguin. [54]

Orlove, B. S. 1980. Ecological anthropology. Ann. Rev. Anthropol. 9: 235-273. [57]
Pearson, K. 1901. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution. IX. On the
principle of homotyposis and its relation to heredity, to the variability of the individual and to that of the race. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 197: 285-379. [173]
Pearson, K. 1902. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution. XI. On the

influence of natural selection on the variability and correlation of organs. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. London,

Ser. A 200: 330-333. [173]

Peoples, J. E. 1982. Individual or group advantage? A reinterpretation of the Maring ritual
cycle. Curr. Anthropol. 23: 291-310. [237]
Petersen, W. 1975. Population. New York: Macmillan.

[176]

Piaget, J. 1962. Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood. New York: Norton. [45]
Pilbeam, D. 1972. The Ascent of Man: An Introduction to Human Evolution. New York:

Macmillan. [155]
Plotkin, H. C. and F. J. Odling-Smee. 1981. A multiple-level model of evolution and its
implications for sociobiology. Behav. Brain Sci. 4: 225-268. [158]
Portuges, S. H. and N. D. Feshbach. 1972. The influence of sex and socioethnic factors
upon imitation of teachers by elementary school children. Child Dev. 43: 981-989.

[55]

Posner, R. A. 1980. A theory of primitive society, with special reference to primitive law.
J. Law Econ. 23: 1-53. [241]
Pospisil, L. 1978. The Kapauku Papuans of West New Guinea. 2d ed. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston. [60]

Provine, W. B. 1971. The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics. Chicago: Univ.
Chicago Press. [179, 290]

Pulliam, H. R. 1982. A social learning model of conflict and cooperation in human societies. Hum. Ecol. 10: 353-363. [202]
Pulliam, H. R. 1983. On the theory of gene-culture co-evolution in a variable environment.
In: Animal Cognition and Behavior, R. L. Mellgren, ed. Amsterdam: NorthHolland. [145, 157, 164]
Pulliam, H. R. and C. Dunford.

1980. Programmed to Learn: An Essay on the Evolution

of Culture. New York: Columbia Univ. Press. [83, 93, 202, 295]
Rancour-Laferriere, D. 1981. Sociobiology and psychoanalysis: Interdisciplinary remarks
on the most imitative animal. Psychoanal. Contemp. Thought 4: 435-526. [244]

Rapoport, A. 1967. Escape from paradox. Sci. Am. 217 (July): 50-56. [282]

Rappaport, R. A. 1968. Pigs for the Ancestors. New Haven, Conn. : Yale Univ. Press. [237]
Rappaport, R. A. 1979. Ecology, Meaning, and Religion. Richmond, Calif.: North Atlantic
Books. [276]
Rice, J., C. R. Cloninger, and T. Reich.

;
;
ae
1978. Multi-factorial inheritance with cultural

transmission and assortative mating. I. Description and basic properties of the unitary
model. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 30: 618-643.

[51, 294]

312

References and Author Index

Rice, J., C. R. Cloninger, and T. Reich. 1980. Analysis of behavioral traits in the presence

of cultural transmission and assortative mating: Application to I.Q. and SES. Behav.
Genet. 10: 73-92. [50, 51, 52, 294]
Richerson, P. J. and R. Boyd. 1978. A dual inheritance model of the human evolutionary
process. I. Basic postulates and a simple model. J. Social Biol. Struct. 1: 127-154.
202
Roff, Ma eo Intra-family resemblances in personality characteristics. J. Psychol. 30:
199-227. [51]
Rogers, E. M. 1983. Diffusion of Innovations. 3d ed. New York: Free Press. [167]
Rogers, E. M. with F. F. Shoemaker. 1971. The Communication of Innovations: A Crosscultural Approach. New York: Free Press. [167, 245-246]
Roher, J. H., S. H. Baron, L. E. Hoffman, and D. V. Swander.

1954. The stability of

é
auto-kinetic judgments. J. Abn. Soc. Psychol. 49: 595-597. [224]
Rosenberg, A. 1980a. Obstacles to the nomological connection of reasons and actions. Phil.
Soc. Sci. 10: 79-91. [38]
Rosenberg, A. 1980b. Sociobiology and the Preemption of the Social Sciences. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. [241]
Rosenhan, D., F. Frederick, and A. Burrowes.

1968. Preaching and practice: Effects of

channel discrepancy on norm internalization. Child Dev. 39: 291-301. [55]
Rosenthal, T. and B. Zimmerman. 1978. Social Learning and Cognition. New York:
Academic Press. [36, 37, 40, 43, 44, 80, 244]
Roughgarden, J. 1979. Theory of Population Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: An
Introduction. New York: Macmillan.

[112]

Ruyle, E. E. 1973. Genetic and cultural pools: Some suggestions for a unified theory of
biocultural evolution. Hum. Ecol. 1: 201-215. [10, 132, 158]
Sahlins, M. 1963. Poor man, rich man, big-man, chief: Political types in Melanesia and

Polynesia. Comp. Stud. Soc. Hist. 5: 285-303. [57]
Sahlins, M. 1976a. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. [38, 242,

271-272, 277-279, 281, 290, 293]
Sahlins, M. 1976b. The Use and Abuse of Biology: An Anthropological Critique of Sociobiology. Ann Arbor: Univ. Michigan Press. [132, 271-272, 279, 281, 293]
Savage, L. J. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley. [87]
Scarr, S. 1981. Toward a more biological psychology. In: Science and the Question of
Human Equality, M. S. Collins, I. W. Wainer, and T. A. Bremner, eds., pp. 71-87.
AAAS

Selected Symp. 58. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

[52, 56]

Scarr, S. and W. B. Barker. 1981. The effects of family background: A study of cognitive
differences between black and white twins. In: Race, Social Class, and Individual
Differences in I.Q., S. Scarr, ed., pp. 261-315. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. [56]
Scarr, S., A. J. Pakstis, S. H. Katz, and W. B. Barker. 1977. Absence of a relationship
between degree of white ancestry and intellectual skills within a black population.
Hum. Genet. 39: 69-86. [56]
Scarr, S. and R. A. Weinberg. 1976. I.Q. performance of black children adopted by white

families. Am. Psychol. 31: 726-739. [51, 56]
Schelling, T. C. 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: Norton. [295]
Schiff, M., M. Duyme, A. Dumaret, J. Stewart, S. Tomkiewicz, and J. Feingold. 1978.

Intellectual status of working-class children adopted early into upper-middle-class
families. Science 200: 1503-1504. [51]
Schneider, D. M. 1968. American Kinship: A Cultural Account. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall. [37]

Schneider, D. M. 1976. Notes toward a theory of culture. In: Meaning in Anthropology, K.
H. Basso and H. A. Selby, eds., pp. 197-220. Albuquerque: Univ. New Mexico
Press. [36, 273]
Schneider, H. K. 1974. Economic Man: The Anthropology of Economics. New York: Free
Press. [241]

Schopf, T. J. M. 1982. A critical assessment of punctuated equilibria. I. Duration of taxa.
Evolution 36: 1144-1157. [60]
Schultz, T. W. 1979. Investment in population quality throughout the low-income coun-

References and Author Index

313

tries. In: World Population and Development, P. M. Hauser, ed., pp. 339-360. New
York: United Nations Fund for Population Activities. [201]

Schwimmer, E. 1978. The Yearbook of Symbolic Anthropology I. London: Hurst, pp.
vii—xili. [272]
Seligman, M. E. and J. L. Hager. 1972. Biological Boundaries of Learning. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts. [86]
Sherif, M. 1935. A study of some social factors in perception. Arch. Psychol. 187. Reprinted in: 1967, Social Interaction, M. Sherif, pp. 125-135. Chicago: Aldine. [224]
Shils, E. 1981. Tradition. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. [56]

Shubik, M. 1970. Game theory, behavior, and the paradox of the Prisoner’s Dilemma:
Three solutions. J. Conflict Resol. 14: 181-193. [230]
Silk, J. B. 1980. Adoption and kinship in Oceania. Am. Anthropol. 82: 799-820.

[272]

Silverstein, M. 1976. Shifters, linguistic categories, and cultural description. In: Meaning
in Anthropology, K. H. Basso and H. A. Selby, eds., pp. 11-55. Albuquerque:
Univ. New Mexico Press. [272]
Simon, H. A. 1957. Models of Man: Social and Rational. New York: Wiley. [94, 273]

Simpson, R. L. 1962. Parental influence, anticipatory socialization and social mobility. Am.

Sociol. Rev. 27: 517-522. [47, 55]
Skinner, B. F. 1953. Science and Human Behavior. New York: Macmillan.

[46]

Skinner, B. F. 1966. The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior. Science 153: 1205-1213.

[86]
Slatkin, M.

1978. On the equilibration of fitnesses by natural selection. Am. Nat.

112:

845-859. [61, 112]
Slatkin, M. and R. Lande. 1976. Niche width in a fluctuating environment—density independent model. Am. Nat. 110: 31-55. [112]
Slatkin, M. and M. J. Wade. 1978. Group selection on a quantitative character. Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 75: 3531-3534. [231]
Slovic, P., B. Fischhoff, and S. Lichtenstein. 1977. Behavioral decision theory. Ann. Rev.
Psychol. 28: 1-39. [168-169]

Smith, A. 1790. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. London: Bohn. [241]
Smith, E. A. 1983. Anthropological applications of optimal foraging theory: A critical
review. Curr. Anthropol. 24: 625-651. [298]
Smith, S. M. 1975. The Battered Child Syndrome. London: Butterworths.

[48, 51]

Spinetta, J. J. and D. Rigler. 1972. The child-abusing parent: A psychological review.
Psychol. Bull. 77: 296-304. [48]
Staddon, J. E. R. 1983. Adaptive Behavior and Learning. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
Univ. Press. [4, 83]
Stanley, S. M. 1979. Macroevolution, Pattern and Process. San Francisco: Freeman. [60,

282]
Stebbins, G. L. and F. J. Ayala. 1981. Is a new evolutionary synthesis necessary? Science
213: 967-971. [290]
Stevens, G. 1981. Social mobility and fertility: Two effects in one. Am. Sociol. Rev. 46:
573-85. [201]
Steward, J. 1955. Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear Evolution.
Urbana: Univ. Illinois Press. [290]
Stigler, G. J. and G. S. Becker. 1977. De gustibus non est disputandum. Am. Econ. Rev.
67(2): 76-90. [241]
Symons, D. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. [12]

Tarde, G. 1903 (1962). The Laws of Imitation. Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith. [280-281]
ne
Taylor, M. 1976. Anarchy and Cooperation. New York: Wiley. (228, 230]

Terhune, K. W. 1974. A review of the actual and expected consequences of family size.
Calspan Report N. DP-5333-G-1, Center for Population Research, National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, U.S. Dept. of Health Education and
Welfare. Publ. (NIH) 75-779. [201]
uncerThelen, M. H., S. J. Dollinger, and K. D. Kirkland. 1979. Imitation and response

tainty. J. Genet. Psychol. 135: 139-152. [224]

[230]
Trivers, R. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46: 35-57.

314

References and Author Index

Tukey, J. W. and F. Mosteller.

1977. Data Analysis and Regression. Reading, Mass.:

;
:
Addison Wesley. [222]
Turelli, M. 1984. Heritable genetic variation via mutation selection balance: Lerch’s zeta
meets the abdominal bristle. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 25: 138-193. [75]

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science 185: 1124-1131. [93, 168]
Twain, M. 1923 (1962). Corn-pone opinions. In: On the Damned Human Race. New York:
Hill & Wang. [32]
Tylor, E. B. 1871 (1920). Primitive Culture: Research into the Development of Mythology,
Philosophy, Religion, Art and Custom. London: Murray. [38]

United Nations. 1973. The Determinants and Consequences of Population Trends: New
Summary of Findings on Interaction of Demographic, Economic and Social Factors.
Population Studies 50. New York: U.N. Dept. of Economic and Social Affairs. [176]
Uyenoyama, M. K. 1979. Evolution of altruism under group selection in large and small
populations in fluctuating environments. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 15: 58-85. [231]
Uyenoyama, M. and M. W. Feldman. 1980. Theories of kin and group selection: A
population genetics perspective. Theoret. Pop. Biol. 17: 380-414. [231]
Van den Berghe, P. L. 1979. Human Family Systems. New York: Elsevier. [12]
Van den Berghe, P. L. 1981. The Ethnic Phenomenon. New York: Elsevier. [231]
Van Maanen, J. and E. H. Schein. 1979. Toward a theory of organizational socialization.
In: Research in Organizational Behavior, B. Staw, ed., pp. 209-263. Greenwich,
Conn.: JAI Press. [237]

Vayda, A. P. and R. A. Rappaport. 1968. Ecology, cultural and noncultural. In: Jntroduction to Cultural Anthropology, J. A. Clifton, ed., pp. 477-497. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin. [290]
Vogel, S. R., I. K. Broverman, D. M. Broverman, F. E. Clarkson, and P. S. Rosenkrantz.

1970. Maternal employment and perception of sex roles among college students.
Dev. Psychol. 3: 384-391. [51]
Waddington, C. H. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes: A Discussion of Aspects of Theoretical
Biology. London: Allen & Unwin.

[83]

Wade, M. J. 1978a. Kin selection: A classical approach and a general solution. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 75: 6154-6158. [231]
Wade, M. J. 1978b. A critical review of the models of group selection. Q. Rev. Biol. 53:
101-114. (230, 231]
Wallace, A. R. 1905. Man’s Place in the Universe. New York: McClure Phillips. [293]
Watson, W., A. Rosenfield, M. Uiravaidya, and K. Chanawongse. 1979. Health, population and nutrition: Interrelation, problems and possible solution. In: World Population and Development, P. M. Hauser, ed., pp. 145-173. New York: U.N. Fund
for Population Activities. [201]
Watt, K. E. F. 1968. Ecology and Resource Management. New York: McGraw-Hill. [24]
Weismann, A. 1893. The Germ Plasm: A Theory of Heredity, W. N. Parker and H. R.
Ronnefeld, trans. London: Waller-Scott. [118]
Weller, R. H. and L. F. Bouvier. 1981. Population: Demography and Policy. New York:
St. Martin’s. [176]
Weltman, N. and H. H. Remmers. 1946. Pupil’s, parent’s and teacher’s attitudes: Similarities and differences. Purdue Univ. Stud. Higher Educ. 56: 1-52. SLes2i

Werner, E. E. 1979. Cross-cultural Child Development: A View from the Planet Earth.
Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/Cole. [46, 47, 48, 179-180, 200]

Werner, E. E. and R. S. Smith. 1982. Vulnerable but Invincible: A Longitudinal Study
of

Resilient Children and Youth. New York: McGraw-Hill. [298, 299]
Werren, J. H. andH. R. Pulliam. 1981. An intergenerational model of the cultural
evolution

of helping behavior. Hum. Ecol. 9: 465-483. [202]

Werts, Ses 1968. Paternal influence on career choice. J. Couns. Psychol.
15: 48-52. [51,

Whiting, B. B. and J. M. W. Whiting. 1975. Children of Six Cultures: A Psycho-cu
ltural
Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 237 pp. [51]

References and Author Index

315

Wickelgren, W. A. 1981. Human learning and memory. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 32: 21-52. [39]
Wilcoxon, H. C., W. B. Dragoin, and P. A. Kral. 1971. Illness-induced aversions in rat

and quail: Relative salience of visual and gustatory cues. Science 171: 826-828. [87]
Williams, G. C. 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current
Evolutionary Thought. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. [231]
Williams, T. R. 1972. Introduction to Socialization: Human Culture Transmitted. Saint
Louis: Mosby. [41]

Wilson, D. S. 1975. A theory of group selection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72: 143-146.
[231]
Wilson, D. S. 1977. Structured demes and the evolution of group advantageous traits. Am.
Nat. 111: 157-185. [231]
Wilson, D. S. 1980. The Natural Selection of Populations and Communities. Menlo Park,
Calif.: Benjamin/Cummings. [231]

Wilson, D. S. 1983. The group selection controversy: History and current status. Ann. Rev.
Ecol. Syst. 14: 159-188. [231]
Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ.
Press. [137 837150. 205]
Wilson, E. O. 1978. On Human Nature. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. [12]
Winter, S. G. 1966. Economic natural selection and the theory of the firm. Yale Econ.

Essays 4(1): 225-272. [94]
Witkin, H. A. and D. R. Goodenough. 1981. Cognitive Styles: Essence and Origins.
Psychological Issues Monogr. 51. New York: International Universities. [179]
Witkin, H. A. and J. W. Berry. 1975. Psychological differentiation in cross-cultural perspective. J. Cross-cultural Psychol. 6: 4—87. [179-180]

Wright, S. 1921. Systems of mating. I. The biocultural relations between parent and
offspring. Genetics 6: 111-178. [173]
Yando, R. M, V. Seitz, and E. Zigler. 1978. Imitation:
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. [40, 45, 244]

A Developmental Perspective.

Yando, R. M. and J. Kagan. 1968. The effect of teacher tempo on the child. Child Dev.
39: 27-34. [55]
Yankelovich, D. 1974. The New Morality: A Profile of American Youth in the 70’s. New
York: McGraw-Hill. [55]
Yarrow, M. R., R. M. Scott, and C. Z. Waxler.

1973. Learning concern for others. Dev.

Psychol. 8: 240-260. [55]
Young, P. A., L. J. Eaves, and H. J. Eysenck. 1980. Intergenerational stability and change
in the causes of variation in personality. Personal. Indiv. Diff. 1: 35-55. [52, 55]
Yussen, S. R. and V. M. Levy. 1975. Effects of warm and neutral models on the attention

of observational learners. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 20: 66-72. [244]

Zajonc, R. B. 1976. Family configuration and intelligence. Science 192: 227-236. [201]
Zajonc, R. B. and G. B. Markus. 1975. Birth order and intellectual development. Psychol.
Rev. 82: 74-88. [201]
Zucker, L. G. 1977. The role of institutionalization in cultural persistence. Am. Sociol. Rev.

42: 726-743. [55, 297]

/i

Subject Index and Glossary of
Mathematical Terms
Note: See also the section entitled “References and Author Index.” In what follows, Greek

symbols are alphabetized under the letter corresponding to their English spelling (e.g. 0
under “t”). Mathematical symbols, including Greek letters, are indexed before words,
regardless of subscripts and other compound elements. A brief definition of each symbol is
given here in brackets, followed by a reference to the page on which the formal definition
occurs.

a [importance of social relative to individual
learning], 96
a(L) [equilibrium importance of cultural transmission in heterogeneous environment],
110

A [weight of parent as model], 183
A; [transmission weight of parent i], 64-65
In models of: biased transmission,

140;

frequency-dependent bias, 209; horizontal
transmission, 68—69; multifactor model,

76-77; nonselective formation of sets of
parents, quantitative characters, 72

Aj [weight of ith model in the transmission of
the jth cultural variant], 249
Aj, Ap; [the importance of the jth model in the
transmission of indicator and preference

traits], 252
A,; [weight of parent in role k of set j], 186
A, [average importance of parents in kth social
role], 187

SA [importance of genetic or cultural transmission relative to learning], 123

Adaptation
cultural vs. genetic, 117-31
due to learning, 4, 14, 86, 128
importance in theories of culture, 33, 281

Adaptationist program, critics of, 13-14, 282
Adaptive consequences of cultural transmission,

14-16, 43, 288-89
with direct bias, 146-57
effect of asymmetric life cycle, 15-16,

188-90, 198, 285-86
with frequency-dependent bias, 213-23
with guided variation, 128-31
with indirect bias, 157-59, 266-67

Adaptive theories of culture, anthropologists’,

33
Afunctionalism
summary discussion of, 293
and symbols, 277-79
Aggression, and social learning, 41—42
Alexander, R., pure environment hypothesis attributed to, 159-60

Altruism

A* [optimal value of transmission relative to
learning], 126
a; [basic weight of ith model], 140

and cultural group selection, 232-33, 286

use in models of: evolution of biased transmission, 148; frequency-dependent bias,
209
Q;, ap; [basic weights of jth model in the trans-

and genetic group selection, 230-32
and group-level functions, 292
problems of explaining, 205
See also Cooperation; Group selection

mission of indicator and preference traits],

Josy)
Acquired variation, inheritance of
cultural transmission as, 8, 82, 283-84

Darwin’s and Pearson’s theories of, 172
See also Guided variation

better models needed, 295

and cooperation, 227—30

Analogies, defense of, 30-31
Anchoring heuristic, as evidence for weak bias,

169
Archaeology, and evidence for cultural inertia,

60
Artifacts, not culture, 36

317

318

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Assortative formation of sets of models, 211

Asymmetric transmission
advantages of, 15-16, 188-90, 198, 285-86

of cognitive style, 180
consequences under natural selection, 173,

178
definition of, 11, 178

and the demographic transition, 201
and strength of direct bias in heterogeneous
environment,

191—93

parent-teacher model of, 182-86
permits strong selection, 198
summary discussion of, 285—86
unilineal kinship and, 202
Authoritarian and authoritative child-rearing
styles, 46-47

Autokinetic effect and experiments on conformity, 224—27
Autonomy of cultural evolution

Behavioral decision theory
as evidence for the strength of decisionmaking forces, 168-70
and nature of learning, 93

Behavioral economics, and learning models, 94
Behavioral psychology
and learning as adaptation, 93
learning experiments of, 83-84
vs. social learning theory, 42
Beliefs, problematical status as cultural variants, 38

Berry, J., adaptive hypothesis for cognitive
style of, 179

Biased modeling, a type of guided variation,
144-45
Biased transmission
definitions of, 10, 132

general purpose vs. habitat-specific rules of,
153-57

and indirect bias, 242

Lumsden and Wilson’s model of, 163—64

and natural selection on cultural variation,

more complex models needed, 295
sociobiological theory and, 157
summary discussion of, 284
types of, 10, 134-36
See also Direct bias; Frequency-dependent

175
summary discussion of, 289

Availability heuristic, evidence for weak
decision-making forces, 168—69

bias; Indirect bias

Blending inheritance
b [a measure of the strength of direct bias on a

quantitative character], 142
in models of: indirect bias, 262; natural se-

__ lection on asymmetric life cycles, 192
b(X) [change in a quantitative character due to
direct bias], 143
bg [effective strength of direct bias for geno-

type G], 148
B [parameter measuring the strength of direct

definition of, 72

and directly biased transmission, 141-44
effect on covariance, 251

and frequency-dependent bias, 222
and guided variation, 96—97

and maintenance of variation, 75
as unbiased estimation, 134

Burley, N., explanation of cryptic estrous of,
199

bias|
definitions for a dichotomous trait, 137
definition for a quantitative trait, 263
in model of indirect bias, 262

Bg [genotype-specific bias parameter], 148

B’ [effective intensity of direct bias], 263
B(*) [bias function]
definition for dichotomous characters, 140
definition for quantitative characters, 141
in model of indirect bias, 253
Bacon, F., on learning vs. tradition, 81
Bandura, A.

social learning theory of, 40-45
work as evidence for indirect bias, 244

Bascom, W., on prestige in Ponapae, 269-70
Baumrind, D., on child-rearing styles, 46-47
Bayesian decision theory
difficulty of following rules of, 92-93
as a model of learning; 87-92, 95

Behavior, as opposed to culture, 36, 70

c [combined response to selection and guided
variation], 122
C [equilibrium value of covariance between indicator and preference traits], 261

C, [covariance for a pair of cultural traits], 248
C(V.) [cost of learning as a function of accuracy of learning], 114-15
Caldwell, J., on cultural transmission of fertil-

ity norms, 201
Campbell, D.
on ethnocentrism, 238—40
_ on group selection of culture, 205
on learning, 132

micro-society experiments of, 225
on the natural selection of culture, 11

Capacity for culture, evolution of, 146. See
also Cultural transmission; specific features of cultural transmission and
evolution

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
Catholic vs. non-Catholic fertility, 176
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.
use of epidemiological models, 8
on cultural vs. genetic transmission, 117
Child abuse, social learning of, 48

Child-rearing practices, as evidence for cultural
transmission, 47—48
Choice, rational, difficulty of, 161. See also

Bayesian decision theory; Costly information hypothesis; Learning costs
Coercion, and cooperation, 229-30

Cognition, human, limits of, 170
Cognitive style
as cultural variation subject to selection,
179-80
and the demographic transition, 200-201
Colonization, mode of, and group selection,

234-35, 237

conflation of genetic and cultural influences,
39, 49
as evidence for cultural transmission, 48-53
and natural selection, 176

and the unequal importance of mothers and
fathers, 52-53
Cost of individual learning. See Learning costs;
Learning, individual

Costly information hypothesis
and direct vs. other types of biases, 135-36
and frequency-dependent bias, 220, 236
and general vs. habitat-specific direct biases,
149-55
and guided variation, 116-17
and indirect bias, 243, 268, 279
introduction to, 14-16, 43

and natural selection on cultural variation,
190-91, 198-99

Complexity, and diversity in human evolution,

and the strength of the decision-making

24
Compliance, vs. acceptance in conformity re-

forces, 166-71, 285
summary discussion of, 288-89

search, 224
Conditioning, and social learning, 41

Conflict, between human groups, and group se-

lection, 231, 238
Conflict theory, and controversy over levels of
explanation, 17, 292
Conformist transmission. See Frequencydependent bias
Conformity, psychological research on, 223-27
Constant environment
equilibrium amount of cultural transmission
in, 104
evolution of direct bias in, 149-52

in Lumsden and Wilson’s model, 164
See also Environments, variable
Contaminated distributions, 221

Continuous variation. See Quantitative
characters

Cooperation
condition for evolutionary increase, 234-35
and conditions favoring conformist transmission, 235
and group selection, 230-32

319

Covariance between characters
definition of, 248

forces affecting, 254-56
and the multifactor model, 79
and the strength of indirect bias, 264-66

Cross-cultural studies

child-rearing practices, 47-48
cognitive style, 179
ethnocentrism, 238—39
warfare, 238

Cryptic estrous, 199-200
Cultural change. See Cultural evolution; Modemizing societies
Cultural endogamy, definition of, 236
Cultural evolution
importance of heritable variation for, 20
need for experimental studies, 297

overview of forces, 8-11
time scale of, 8

Cultural extinction

not requiring mortality, 237
role in cultural group selection, 233-35
Cultural inertia

vs. self-interest, 228

as evidence for cultural transmission, 56—60,

summary, 286—87
See also Altruism; Group selection

and guided variation, 97

Corn, alkali treatment of, 153

Corporations
as culturally endogamous groups, 237
and rational decision making, 92
Correlated environments
confounded with genetic and cultural transmission, 38—40

models of needed, 295
Correlations, familial

171
Cultural inheritance. See Cultural transmission
Cultural offspring, definition of, 8
Cultural parents (models)

biased modeling as choices by, 144
definition of, 8

effective number of, 74, 142, 189, 210,
250-51

number of and advantages of asymmetric
transmission,

188—90.

320

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Cultural parents (continued)
unequal numbers of, 186-88, 253-54

See also Asymmetric transmission; Nonrandom formation of sets of cultural
parents
Cultural reason

and indirect bias, 254-59, 261-66
maintenance of, 67—68, 75-78, 98, 109,

129, 151-52, 155
for mortality and fecundity, 175-76
and natural selection, 174-75
in need for achievement, 59—60

and runaway process, 277-79
M. Sahlins’s hypothesis, 242, 271-72, 293

in religious belief, 176-77

summary discussion of, 293-94

and variation among groups, 158

Cultural repertoire
as analog of genotype, 36

Culture

definition of, 33
Cultural selection, of Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman, as biased transmission, 132
Cultural transmission
of acquired variation, 8, 125

adaptive advantages compared with genetic
transmission,

117—31, 288

age structured models needed, 295
analogy with genetic transmission, 4
confounded with genetic transmission and
correlated environments, 38—40
and costly information,

in status and prestige, 244—47

14-15, 43. See also

Costly information hypothesis

and biology in theories of human behavior,
281
definition of, 2, 32-38
as distinct from learning, 4

distinguished from environment, 5
holism and definition of, 38
individuals as locus of, 37
as inherited information, 34—36
in nonhuman animals, 34-35, 130-31

as patterns of thought and feeling, 36
population-level properties of, 6
as social norms, 37
and symbols, 36-37
Culturgen, unit of cultural inheritance, 37

evidence for the existence of, 40-60,

166-70, 223-27
evolution of, 98-106,

109-10,

112-13,

116-17, 130
of fertility norms, 201
horizontal and oblique, 53-56. See also

D [frequency-dependent bias parameter], 208
use in models of: cultural group selection,
232; evolution of frequency-dependent
bias, 214

® [as biased modeling parameter], 145

Asymmetric transmission

importance of evolutionary origins of, 12, 16
in Lumsden and Wilson’s model, 163, 165
need for laws of, 295
in nonhuman animals, 82, 130-31

quantitative field studies needed, 298-99
as rule of learning, 43

sequential structure of, 8
as a system of inheritance, 20, 32, 283

and various forms of bias, 135
See also Dichotomous characters; Imitation;
Learning, social; Quantitative characters;

Socialization
Cultural variant, definition of, 33

Cultural variation
for altruistic beliefs, 204—6

among various groups, several examples,
56-60

% [as cost of being punished], 229
6L [a small change in the learning rule, L], 99
Ap [change in frequency of a cultural variant
under natural selection], 182

At [characteristic time for horizon
transmission], 68
Darlington, C. D., ideas approximating pure
genes hypotheses, 159
Darwin, C.
on evolution and human behavior, 1
and inheritance of acquired variation, 20, 82,

172-73
postulates for action of natural selection, 11,
173
scientific method of, 19
Darwinian theory of culture. See Darwinism
Darwinism

and biased transmission, 138, 142, 209, 254

basic structure of, 2, 20

for cognitive style, 179-80
distinguished from behavioral variation,
70-71

reconciliation with Mendelism,

and the evolution of bias, 154-56,

192-94

for food preferences, 177-78
and frequency-dependent bias, 209-23
heritability of, 24, 52, 55, 158-61, 165,
Al, PAS)

173

and social sciences, 1, 282, 290-94

Decision making, and evolutionary forces,
summary, 284-85. See also Biased transmission; Learning, individual; Rational

choice
Decision-making costs. See Costly information
hypothesis

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

321

Developmental stages, and social learning theory, 45
Diachronic processes, relationship to synchronic processes, 17, 290-92

Durham, W., environment plus culture hypoth-

Dialect evolution, as evidence for indirect bias,

e; [errors in naive individual’s estimations of

esis attributed to, 159, 162

model’s cultural variant], 71

246-47, 261, 265-66
Dichotomous characters
compared with quantitative characters, 70,

141
examples of, 64
model of transmission of, 64—69
in models of: direct bias, 137-41,

148-57;

frequency-dependent bias, 201-13; natural

in model of biased transmission, 141

e, [errors in the naive individual’s estimate of
the jth factor of the ith model], 78
E, [variance of e;], 71-72
E,; [covariance of estimation errors], 72
in model of indirect bias, 250-51

E [average cultural error rate], 74

selection, 180-88
Diffusion of innovations
as evidence for directly biased transmission,
166-68

effect on equilibrium value of L, 105
__ and guided variation, 97

as evidence for indirect bias, 245-46
Direct bias

e [errors made during the learning process],
94-95
Ecological anthropology, 298
Ecological explanations, vs. historical, 290
Ecological processes

adaptive consequences of, 146
cost vs. indirect bias, 258
definition of, 10, 135

E; [average cultural error rate for trait i], 250
€(p;) [subpopulation extinction rate], 232-35

as determinants of behavior, 57-59

as derived force, 146
dichotomous character model of, 137-41

distinguished from: frequency-dependent
bias, 213; guided variation, 136-37, 284;
natural selection, 174-75
evolution of, 149-57, 191-94

and evolution of: frequency-dependent bias,
213; indirect bias, 258; symbolic traits,

273

relationship to evolutionary processes, 17,
290-92
Edgerton, R., study of East African peoples,
57-59
Effective number of parents of models. See n.
Empirical data
more needed, 296—99
use in theory construction, 29

general vs. habitat-specific, 153-57, 165-66
genetic modification of, 147

Empirical tests, of simple models and general

may not prevent cultural maladaptations,
191-94, 198
more effective with more models, 142, 189
quantitative model of, 141-44
as sociobiological force, 157

Enculturation. See Cultural transmission
Evironment

Disanalogies, between culture and genes, 7-8,

definitions of, 23, 64, 70-71
and guided variation, 96—100
See also Quantitative characters

Environments, variable

in model of indirect bias, 264, 267

summary discussion of, 287
Drift, cultural, 9, 62, 69
Dual inheritance theory
deficiencies of, 294
definition of, 2
as linking competing views, 291—92

summary of, 3-17
and symbolic traits, 293

utility of, 16-17, 289-94

relationship to genetic system, 3

Environment plus culture hypothesis, 161-63

Drift-away process

202-3, 288-89

definition of, 5
as distinguished from culture, 5
and learning, 94-95, 98, 100

See also Environments, variable
Environment, correlated or transmissible. See
Correlated environments

31
Distribution of cultural variants

and sociobiology controversy,

theory, 28

12-16, 133,

cultural vs. genetic adaptation to, 125-28
and the evolution of: directly biased transmission, 152-57, 191-93; frequencydependent bias, 216-23; guided variation,
106-29; indirect bias, 258
and learning, 14, 94

and variation among human groups, 158
Epigenetic rules, biased transmission as,
132-33
Erickson, M., on effects of religious affiliation
on behavior, 177

Errors in learning
cost of reducing, 113-14

322

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Errors in learning (continued)
effect on evolution of cultural transmission,
IOS, WB}, Wie), 48
and guided variation, 95-97
Errors in social learning. See Random variation
ESS. See Evolutionarily stable strategy
Ethnocentrism, as example of cultural group selection, 238-40

Evolution

cosmological and geological vs. cultural and
genetic, 35

importance of synthetic theory of, 3, 173,
290
Evolutionarily stable strategy
for amount of altruistic behavior, 232-35

for amount of frequency-dependent bias,

214-21
for amount of learning, 104-6, 110, 113-14
and interaction of selection and direct bias,

191-94
relationship to modifier approach, 61
for strength of direct biases, 149-57

Evolutionary processes, relationship to ecological processes, 290—92
Experiments
on cultural evolution, 297
on mechanics of social learning needed,

4445
Extinction, cultural, and group selection,

232-34, 237-38
f(H) [probability density of environmental parameter, H, in a heterogeneous

environment], 106-7
f(p) [function used to determine equilibrium
under selection, frequency-dependent bias

and migration], 218
Fec, Fre, Fea, Fea [frequencies of individuals with
genotypes e and f, and cultural variants c

and d], 214
Fox [frequency of individuals with genotype G
and cultural variant X], 147
F(Y) [distribution of phenotypic values], 96
and evolution of cultural transmission, 101,
LO Stei2eml2 2

F [cost of punishing], 229
Familial correlations. See Correlations, familial
Family size vs. professional success, 200-201
Fecundity, cultural variation for, 175—77
Feldman, M.

on cultural vs. genetic adaptation, 117
use of epidemiological models as analogs of
cultural transmission, 8

Female choice, 294. See also Sexual selection
Field dependence and independence, 179-80,

200

Fisher, R.

on reconciliation of Mendelism with quantitative variation, 75

on runaway sexual selection, 259
Fitness

heritable variation for at equilibrium, 256

geometric mean, 112, 117-18
See also S; 7; W; Natural selection
Fitness, inclusive, 12-13
Fitness function, 100-101
in Freudian model, 195
and indirect bias, 255-56

Fitness maximization. See Adaptive consequences of cultural transmission
Fluctuating environment. See Environments,
variable
Food aversion learning, 84—87

Food foraging peoples, cognitive style in, 179
Food preferences
as culturally transmitted, 35
subject to natural selection, 177—78

Forces of cultural evolution
biased transmission as, 134
definition of, 2, 23
field measurements needed, 298

and inheritance structures, 3
list of, 8-11

Forces of genetic evolution, 2-3, 62
Freedman, R., on cultural transmission of fer-

tility norms, 201
Frequency-dependent bias
adaptive advantages of, 213-23, 286
and advantages of asymmetric transmission,
190
definitions of, 10, 135, 206

and group selection, 205—6, 232-40
relation to conformity measure of psychologists, 223-24
summary discussion of, 286
Freudian model, 194—97
Functionalism, symbolic, 274-77, 287-88

g(j) [probability that colonizers are drawn from

j subpopulations], 234
G [as numerical value of genetic variants], 147
in model of direct bias, 147-49, 153, 192
G [as value of quantitative genetic trait],
194-97
y [response to selection], 120
I'(H) [objective of learning rule], 94-95
Galef, B., on types of social learning, 34-36
Games, children’s, as evidence for horizontal
transmission, 55
Garcia, J., food aversion experiments of,

84-87

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
Generality vs. realism and predictive power of
models, 25
General-purpose biases, 153-57, 192, 284
General theory
definition of, 25
as a family of sample theories, 26
synthetic function of, 27

utility of, 27-28
Genes plus culture hypothesis, 165—66
Genetic transmission
adaptive properties compared to cultural
transmission,

323

H [a measure of habitat], 94-95
use in models of: indirect bias, 257; guided

variation, 96-128
H, [culturally optimal trait value, in Freudian

model], 195
H, [genetically optimal trait value, in Freudian

model], 195
H;, Hp [optimum vectors of preference and in-

dicator traits], 255
Habitat-specific bias. See General purpose
biases

117-31

Hauser, P., on Catholic vs. non-Catholic fertil-

confounded with cultural transmission and

ity, 176
Heritability. See Cultural variation and Genetic
variation, heritability of
Heterogeneous environments. See Environ-

correlated environments, 38—40, 49-55
of determinants of learning, 98-100, 118-21

haploid models, 61-62, 147, 192, 214
in Lumsden and Wilson’s models, 163—66
quantitative models of, 121, 194
relationship to environment, 3
Genetic variation
group selection on, 230-32

heritability of, 51, 55

ments, variable

Heuristics
as evidence for weak bias and guided variation, 168-70
and rational choice, 93—94

Historical explanations vs. ecological expla-

maintenance of, 45, 75, 121, 173

for modifiers affecting cultural transmission.
See Evolutionarily stable strategy
role in sociobiological hypotheses, 158-60,
163-67
and variation among human groups, 56, 158
Greeley, A. M., study of immigrant attitudes,
59
Group selection
cultural: and conformist transmission,

227-35; and cultural endogamy, 236; and
cultural extinction, 237-38; empirical tests
needed, 298; and evolution of ethnic cooperation, 238—40; and frequency-dependent
bias, 205; on symbolic variation, 275—77

nations, 17, 290

Holism
and definition of culture, 38
vs. reductionism, 23-24

Homogeneous environment. See Constant
environment
Horizontal transmission
and biased transmission, 139
definition of, 8
dichotomous model with, 68—69

and frequency-dependent bias, 210
See also Asymmetric transmission
Human groups, differences between. See Variation between human groups

genetic, 230-32
See also Altruism; Cooperation

Guided variation
basic model of, 95—97
biased modeling similar to, 145
definition of, 9, 82
distinguished from: biased transmission,
136-37; selection, 174

I [cost of cooperation], 228
Identification
as form of indirect bias, 244
and social learning, 45
Imitation, and definition of culture, 35. See
also Cultural transmission; Learning,
social

evidence on strength of, 166-70
and evolution of frequency-dependent bias,
213

Immigrant groups, differences as evidence for

evolution of the strength of, 104-17

Indicator traits, 243. See also Indirect bias

may not prevent cultural maladaptations,
191-94, 198
and sociobiological theory, 133, 157-66
summary discussion of, 283-84
Guiding criteria

Indirect bias
adaptive advantages of, 242—43, 257-59,
268, 287

and biased transmission,

136-37

role in guided variation, 9-10

cultural inertia, 59

Imprinting, and definition of culture, 35

and advantags of asymmetric transmission,
190
analogy with runaway sexual selection,
259-60, 293

324

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Indirect bias (continued )

definition of, 10, 135, 243
evidence for, 244-47
fitness maximized by, 266
maladaptive consequences of, 243, 268, 287;
examples, 269-71

models of runaway and drift-away processes,
260-68
quantitative character model of, 249-56
summary discussion of, 287-88
and symbols, 271-79, 293. See also Cultural

reason; Symbolic hypotheses; Symbols
as useful general purpose rule, 258, 268
Indirectly biased traits, definition of, 243

Individualism, methodological, and controversy
over levels of explanation, 17, 23-24. See
also Individuals, relationship to

populations
Individual learning. See Learning, individual
Individuals, relationship to populations, 37,
292-93
Industrial societies
cognitive style in, 179
fecundity patterns, evolution of, 199-202
Information
definition of, 35

and rule learning, 43
Information cost. See Costly information

hypothesis
Inheritance, cultural and genetic. See Cultural

transmission; Genetic transmission

Inheritance of acquired variation

Janssen, S., on Catholic vs. non-Catholic fertil-

ity, 176
Jenkin, F., on effects of blending inheritance, 75
Jensen, G., on effects of religious affiliation on
behavior, 177

Jointness of supply, as a property of public
goods, 227
K(G, X) [fitness cost of psychic conflict], 197

HX [number of punishers], 229
Kahneman, D., on failures of human judgments, 93, 168
Kamikazes, as example of altruism, 204
Katz, S., on food preferences as cultural variation, 177-78
Keesing, R., on theories of culture, 33
Kin selection, and evolution of altruism, 205.

See also Group selection; Cooperation; Altruism; Unilineal kinship
Kroeber, A., and C. Kluckhohn, on definitions
of culture, 32

L [a measure of an individual’s propensity to

rely on individual learning], 95
equilibrium conditions for: in constant environments, 104—6; in fluctuating environ-

ments, 112; in heterogeneous environments, 109

evolution of, 99-106, 130

Lo [a reference value of L], 99
L* [evolutionary equilibrium value of L], 105
effect of learning costs, 115

error of Darwin, 82, 172
and guided variation, 82, 95—97
Pearson’s model of, 173

A(x) [probability that the frequency of cooperators among colonists is greater than x],

structural feature of culture, 8, 9
summary discussion of culture as, 283
See also Guided variation

Labov, W.

234
on dialect evolution, 261
and evidence for indirect bias, 246—47

Inheritance structures and evolutionary forces, 3
Initial phenotype

Lamarkian inheritance. See Inheritance of acquired variation; Guided variation

cultural vs. genetic transmission of, 117—28
definition of, 94
Innovations, diffusion of. See Diffusion of
innovations

Land, G., on mortality of Latter-day Saints,

Intrademic and interdemic group selection,

Learning, individual

176
Latter-Day Saints, doctrines as cultural variation, 176-77

definitions of, 230-31
Introspection, and culture, 38
Intuitive models, vs. mathematical models, 30

compared to: biased transmission, 136-37;
selection, 132

1Q

116, 288-89
costs of and sociobiological hypotheses, 161

difficulty of distinguishing cultural and genetic influences, 39

studies of familial correlations, 49—52
variation among groups, 56

as costly and error prone, 14, 92-94, 114,

and definition of culture, 34

effect of errors in on evolution of cultural
transmission, 116-17

J [width of bias function], 142

essential features of, 85-86, 91-92, 94
function in variable environments, 106

Jacobs, R., micro-society experiments of, 225

and genetic transmission, 118-21

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
laboratory experiments on, 83-84
models of: Bayesian, 89-92; generalized,
94-95; linear, 84—85
relation to social learning, 81-82, 97

role in human sociobiology, 13
ubiquity of, 4, 83
See also Decision making; Guided variation;

Rational choice

Learning, social
as acquisition of cultural rules, 43—44
A. Bandura’s theory of, 41-44

153-57, 191-94; frequency-dependent
bias, 216, 222; guided variation, 106-10;

indirect bias, 257-58
and group selection, 235, 275

M\(X;) [marginal probability that the ith model
has the cultural variant, X;]
definition of, 66

redefined as a marginal density for quantitative character, 72

M(Xj,...,Xa) [joint probability distribution of
Xie

behaviorist theory of, 41

definition of, 66

data as evidence for indirect bias, 244-45
definition of, 40
and definition of culture, 33-34
equilibrium importance, 104—6, 108-10,

redefined as a joint density for quantitative
characters, 72

112-13, 129-30
in laboratory, 41—42

population-level properties of, 7
reinforcement not required, 42—43
shortcomings of data, 44-45, 296-97
structuralist theory of, 45

325

in a model of horizontal transmission, 69

M(Xi,...,Xn) [the joint probability density that
a set of models forms with a particular
combination of vectors of cultural

variants], 250
M [number of cooperators in a group], 228
Ma, My [genetic mutation rates], 62
Mc, fea [cultural error rates], 68

G. Tarde’s theory of, 280

Macrofunctionalism, controversy over levels of

See also Cultural transmission; Imitation;
Socialization

explanation and, 17
Maladaptive variation, cultural

Learning costs
biased transmission and, 149
effect on evolution of cultural transmission,

114-16
summary discussion of, 285
See also Costly information hypothesis
Levels of explanation, 23-24
LeVine, R.
on ethnocentrism, 238

on relation of “need for achievement” to economic development, 59-60

Levins, R., on modeling strategy, 25
Lie scale, evidence for cultural transmission,

52
Life cycle, of cultural organism, 21
Linear cultural transmission
examples of, 64-65, 68
relation to biased transmission, 123, 137
See also Unbiased transmission
Line of equilibria, in model of indirect bias,

264
Linkage disequilibrium, cultural analog of, 100
Longevity, selection on cultural variation for,

176

causes of, 228; frequency-dependent bias,
204-6, 227, 236; indirect bias, 268; natu-

ral selection, 185-86, 190, 198-99, 286
evolution of, 14-16

examples of, 242; fertility limitation,
199-202; giant yams, 269-70; tattooing,
270-71; unilineal inheritance, 202

and runaway process, 267—69, 279
and symbolic hypotheses, 242, 271, 277-79
See also Asymmetric transmission; Costly information hypothesis; Sociobiological
theory
Malaria, and favism, 178
Martha’s Vineyard, dialect evolution on, 261,

264-65
Mathematical models. See Models,
mathematical
Mating system, cultural, 8
Matrilineal descent
explanations for, 13, 202

and group selection on culture, 236-37
Mature phenotype, definition of, 94
McCready, W. C., study of immigrant
attitudes, 59

Longitudinal studies, need to combine with

McEvoy, L., on Latter-Day Saints’ low mor-

psychometric studies, 298
Lumsden, C., on the relationship between
genes and culture, 159, 162-65

tality, 176
Meaning, of symbolic behaviors. See Cultural
reason; Symbols
Mechanisms, models of, vs. origins, 282

m [rate of cultural contact or migration], 108
in models of evolution of: direct bias,

Meiotic drive, analogy with biased transmission, 8

326

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Melanesian social organization, vs. Polynesian,
Si)
Meme, unit of cultural inheritance, 37
Mendelism, 173

Migration
effect on correlation of fitness with trait values at equilibrium, 257
and evolution of: direct bias, 153-57; of

frequency-dependent bias, 216, 222;
guided variation, 106—8

and group selection, 230-35, 275
See also Environments, variable; m
Modeling, biased, 144—46
Mode of production, effects on culture, 58-59

Models, as cultural parents, 7, 68-69. See also

Cultural parents
Models, mathematical
and Darwinism, 20-23

defense of use, 30
recursion, 21—23

tradeoffs among generality, realism, and pre-

dictive power of, 25
vs. intuitive models, 30

Modernizing societies
and selection on cultural variation, 180,

199-202
and variation for psychological traits, 59-60
Modifier appruach. See Evolutionarily stable
strategy
Mortality, cultural variation for, 175-77
Multifactor model
of cultural transmission, 76-79
effect on covariance between characters, 254
Multiple cultural characters, modeling of,

247-48
Mutation
effect in a genetic model, 62—63

and genetic variation, 75
its cultural analog, 67

See also

n [as the number of subpopulations], 216
n [as the number of models], 71, 139
n, [the effective number of models], 74, 97
and direct bias, 142, 189

effect on equilibrium value of L, 105
and frequency-dependent bias, 210
and indirect bias, 250

n, [geometric mean effective number of
models], 251

N [population size], 69
in models of: cooperation, 228, 275; effect
of selection, 101—2, 181-82

N; [size of jth subpopulation], 275
N(ei,.--,€n) [multivariate normal distribution of
cultural transmission errors], 71-72
Naive individuals, definition of, 8

Natural origins, argument from
as a defense of sociobiology, 13-14
and evolution of direct bias, 146

summary discussion of, 288-89
and symbolic hypotheses, 271, 279
See also Sociobiological theory
Natural selection, on cultural variation
as autonomous force, 175
definition of, 174
and the demographic transition, 199-202

distinguished from guided variation and biased transmission, 174—75
empirical examples of, 175—80
general discussions of, 11, 173-74, 285-86

and guided variation, 121-22
on indicator trait, 261
models of: Freudian model, 194-97; with
multiple social roles, 186-88; parentteacher, 182-86; symmetric life cycle,

181-82
See also Group selection on cultural variation
Natural selection, on genetic variation
and the evolution of asymmetric transmission, 189

and the evolution of cultural transmission
and guided variation, 98-130
and the evolution of direct bias, 149-57
and the evolution of frequency-dependent
bias, 213-21
on quantitative characters,

100-104,

118-21

summary discussion, 288-89
See also Cultural transmission, adaptive advantages; Evolutionarily stable strategy

Nature-nurture controversy
and culture, 34

and difficulty of distinguishing cultural and
genetic influences, 39
Need for achievement, as cultural variation,

59-60
Nisbett, R., on heuristics in natural settings,
169-70
Nonconformist transmission, 212
Nonparental transmission, evidence for, 53-55.

See also Asymmetric transmission
Nonrandom formation of sets of cultural parents
and frequency-dependent bias, 211
and maintenance of variation, 75-76
Nonselective formation of sets of cultural parents
definition of, 67
for quantitative characters, 72

©, Og [probability of becoming a teacher as a
function of cultural trait c or d (teacher’s

cultural fitness)], 183
Q(Y) [cultural fitness as a function of phenotype, in Freudian model], 195

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
Oblique transmission, 53-56. See also Asymmetric transmission
Observational learning. See Learning, social;
Cultural transmission
Occupational interests, familial correlations

and, 52
Opinion leadership, as evidence for indirect
bias, 245-46
Optimal foraging theory, and learning, 93
Origins, vs. mechanisms, as objects of the-

oretical inquiry, 282

327

Population genetics
approach of, 61-63
as an example of a general theory, 25
Population-level consequences, definition of, 4
Populations, relationship to individuals, 37,

292-93
Population structure, and group selection, 231

Prairie dogs, burrows as an example of culture
or correlated environment, 36
Preadaptation, cultural, as evidence for cultural
transmission, 59

Predictive power, vs. generality and realism of
models, 25

p [frequency of cultural variant], 64
in models of: biased transmission, 138, 145;
frequency-dependent bias, 208; natural selection, 181

Preference trait
definitions of, 243, 260

evolutionary model of, 260-66
Prestige

Pc, Pa [frequencies of cooperators and defectors

evolution under indirect bias, 243, 259,

among colonizers], 219
pi [value of p in subpopulation i], 153
p: [central unstable equilibrium frequency of c],

268-69, 293-94
as group functional trait, 276
highly desired, 241—42
in Polynesia, 270-71

219

p: [and cultural group selection], 232
p [equilibrium frequency of p], 68
p [average frequency of c in the whole
population], 217
and cultural group selection, 232
P., Pg [internal minima and maxima of f(p;)],
233
Py [reference value of p], 218
P(X) [distribution of a cultural variant for a
quantitative character], 70-71
and effect of genetic variation for L, 100

and guided variation, 96
P(X;,Xp) [the joint distribution of indicator and
preference traits], 255
¢ [fraction of the subpopulation that are at the
cooperative equilibrium, p.], 233
Parental care, and the evolution of culture, 82

Parents, cultural. See Cultural parents
Parent-teacher model,

182-86

Particulate inheritance. See Blending inheritance; Dichotomous characters; Genetic

variation, maintenance of
Patrilineal kinship, explanations for, 202. See

also Unilineal inheritance

Personality traits, and social learning, 45
Phenotypic plasticity. See Learning, individual
Phylogenetic inertia, cultural analog of, 56—60,

96, 171
Plains Indians, traditional differences among,

57
Political affiliations, familial correlations, 52

Polynesia
tattooing in, 270
vs. Melanesian social organization, 57

Ponapae, prestige on, 269

on Ponapae, 269
Prisoner’s Dilemma and cooperation, 228

Professional success vs. family size, 200-201
Protestant churches, doctrines as cultural variation, 176

Psychoanalytic theory, and social learning, 45
Psychometric studies
as evidence for cultural transmission, 48-53

need to combine with longitudinal studies, 298
Public goods, and cooperation, 227—28. See
also Altruism; Group selection
Pure environment hypothesis, 160-61

Pure genes hypothesis, 163—64

q [gene frequency], 61
q [equilibrium gene frequency], 63
dc [genotypic frequency of G], 147
qi [frequency of cultural variant c in subpopulation i], 153
Q(X) [distribution of genetic values], 120
Quantitative characters
cultural transmission of, 70-79

effects of: direct bias, 141-44; frequencydependent bias, 221-23; guided variation,
94-98; indirect bias, 247-57; natural selection, 194—97
genetic transmission of, 121, 194-97
Pearson’s theory of, 173

See also Blending inheritance
Quantitative field studies of cultural variation
and evolution, need for, 297

r [correlation among models], 211
R [environmental autocorrelation in a
fluctuating environment], 111

328

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

R [a measure of the extent to which sets of

models are the same for two traits], 251
R [benefit for cooperation], 228
p [logarithm of the ratio of geometric mean
fitnesses of cultural and genetic
populations], 125
Random variation
and biased transmission, 141

in a blending model of cultural transmission,
72-16
in a dichotomous model of cultural transmission, 67—68
and evolution of direct bias, 151-52
and evolution of guided variation, 106-16
force in cultural evolution, 9, 283

and frequency-dependent bias, 222-23
and guided variation, 95-97
and indirect bias, 249
in a multifactor model of cultural transmission, 76-79
See also e; E; €

Rational choice
Bayesian model of, 87-92
and biased transmission, 136-37
and learning, 83, 92-94
limits of, 168-70
See also Biased transmission; Learning,
individual

Realism, vs. generality and predictive power of
models, 25

Reciprocity, as alternative to group selection,
230. See also Altruism; Cooperation

Recursion equation, illustration of Darwinian
approach, 20-23, 61
Reductionism, and dual inheritance theory,

23-24
Reinforcement, and social learning, 42-43, 46

Religious beliefs
as cultural variation for fecundity and mortality, 176-77, 202
as examples of group selection on symbolic
variation, 276
familial correlations for, 52

See also entries under specific religions
Representativeness heuristic, evidence for weak
bias and guided variation, 168

Robust estimators, analogy with frequencydependent bias, 221
Rogers, E., on the diffusion of innovations,

166-68, 245-46
Ross, L., on heuristics in natural settings,

169-70
Rules, social learning as transmission of,
43-44
Rules of thumb and learning, 92-94. See also

Heuristics

Runaway process
and creation of meaning, 277
and evolution of maladaptations, 278
examples: tattooing, 269; yams, 269

in model of indirect bias, 264—67
summary discussion of, 287
See also Freudian model

s [selection differential], 149, 184
s- [effective selection differential due to

frequency-dependent bias], 215
s; [selection differential in the ith

subpopulation], 216
S [width of Gaussian fitness function for a

quantitative character], 100-101
S.v [width of fitness function for a genetically
transmitted initial phenotype averaged over

acquired phenotypes], 118-19
S., Sg [width of fitness functions for culture

and genes, in Freudian model], 195
S; [width of fitness function for psychic conflict
in Freudian model], 197
a [selection differential for teachers], 184

Sahlins, M.
cultural reason hypothesis of, 242, 271, 277
on political differences between Melanesians
and Polynesians, 57
Sample theories, definition of, 24—25
Scarr, S., on absence of racial variation for IQ,

56
Selection differential, due to biased transmission, 150. See also s; a
Self-interest. See Altruism; Cooperation; Group

selection
Self-sacrificial beliefs. See Altruism
Sensitivity analysis, difficult with complex
models, 26
Sequential transmission
and bias forces, 284—85

as structural feature of culture, 8
Sex differences, and cultural endogamy, 236

Sexual selection
analogy with indirect bias, 243, 259-60, 293

caused by cultural preferences, 277-78
See also Runaway process
Sherif, M., experiments on conformity, 224
Simple models, advantages of, 24-25
Social learning. See Learning, social
Social norms
and definition of culture, 37
familial correlations for, 52

and symbolic traits, 276
Social roles
cognitive style and achievement of, 180
multiple, model of selection on, 186-88

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
Socialization
as evidence for cultural inheritance, 46-49
pattern as structure of inheritance, 8
See also Cultural transmission; Imitation;
Learning, social
Social status, and indirect bias, 245-47
Social stratification, experimental studies of,

297
Sociobiological hypotheses
vs. afunctional hypothesis, 277
and altruism, 205
assumptions in model of guided variation,
98-99
definition of, 12-14
and demographic transition, 199
and dual inheritance theory, 133, 157,
202-3, 288-89
and explanation of cultural variation, 198
importance of biased transmission in, 132,
138
importance as standard of comparison,
170-71
and learning vs. tradition, 81

objections by symbolic anthropologists,
271-73
summary discussion of, 281, 288-89
testing of alternatives to, 298
as theory of utility, 242

types of, 158-66
and unilineal kinship, 202
See also Costly information hypothesis; Natural origins, argument from
Sociolinguistics and examples of indirect bias,

246-47, 261, 273
Sociological traits, familial correlations for, 52.

See also Psychometric studies
Spatially varying environment. See Environments, variable
Stationary distribution, definition of, 111
Stratified societies, child-rearing practices in, 48
Structuralism, and social learning, 45

Structure of inheritance systems
definition of, 2

differences between genetic and cultural, 7
field data needed, 298
See also Asymmetric transmission
Subdivided populations and evolution of
frequency-dependent bias, 213
Subjective probabilities, in Bayesian decision
theory, 87
Supernatural beliefs, example of group selection on symbolic variation, 274-77

Symbolic hypotheses
and indirect bias, 242, 271-79, 293-94
vs. sociobiological hypotheses, 242-43,
271-73
types of, 273-79

329

Symbols
and cultural evolution, summary,
derinition of, 272
and definition of culture, 36—37

293-94

meaning of, generated by runaway process,
277-79, 287-88
as nonfunctional variations, 274
role in human evolution, 17, 271

Symmetric transmission
consequences of selection on, 178-80

definition of, 11

See also Asymmetric transmission
Synchronic processes, relationship to diachronic
processes,

17, 290-92

7; [subset of possible roles], 186
6' [effective intensity of indirect bias], 263
O(*) [indirect bias function], 253, 263
Tabula rasa, and Lumsden and Wilson’s model,

163-64
Tarde, G., sociological theory of, 280-81
Tattooing, in Polynesia, 270

Teaching, and definition of culture, 35
Temporally varying environment. See Environments, variable
Theoretical models, further research need,

294-96 |
Tool traditions, persistence as evidence for cultural inertia, 60
Tradition, as opposed to learning, 81-82,

167-68
Transmission, horizontal, oblique, and vertical.

See Asymmetric transmission; Symmetric
transmission
Transmission rule
algebraic representation of, 66
definition of, 61
See also Cultural transmission; Genetic
transmission

Trimmed mean transmission rule, a form of
frequency-dependent bias, 221
Tversky, A., on failures of human judgments,
93, 168
Twin studies, and estimation of importance of
cultural variation, 49-51

u [parameter of model of indirect bias], 263
U [variance of Y, model’s observable phenotypic behavior], 79
in the Freudian model, 195

U. [variance of mature phenotype under cultural transmission], 122

U(H) [variance of a cultural trait after learning
in environment H], 107
Unbiased cultural transmission
adaptive advantages of, 16, 134-35

330

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms

Unbiased cultural transmission (continued)
distinguished from biased transmission, 135,
206
evolution of in Lumsden and Wilson’s

Variation among human groups
and conformist transmission and group selec-

tion, 232, 275
and cooperation, 235-36
explanations for, 56, 158-66

model, 164

favored in constant environments,

152

vs. general purpose, 153-55
vs. habitat-specific bias, 155-57
See also Biased transmission; Linear cultural

transmission
Underdevelopment, economic, 296. See also

and habitat-specific vs. general purpose bias,
153-57
See also Cultural variation; Environmental
variation; Genetic variation
Variation, cultural, genetic, environmental. See
Cultural variation; Environmental vari-

ation; Genetic variation

Modernizing societies
Understandability, criterion of a good model,

25-26
Unlineal kinship

W..(X,H) [average fitness of initial phenotype

alternative explanations for, 202

and group selection on culture, 236
and scale of conflict, 238
Unstratified societies, child-rearing practices in,

48
Utilitarian theory

X in habitat H], 118
W., Wg [cultural fitnesses], 181
Waex [fitnesses of individuals with genotype G
and cultural variant X], 149
W., W; [fitnesses of individuals with genotypes
e and f averaged over all phenotypes ac-

quired by learning], 101

shortcomings of, 241

sociobiological theory basis for, 242
Utility, in Bayesian decision theory, 87

W(X;,Xp) [cultural fitness as a function of indi-

cator and preference traits], 255
W, [mean fitness in generation t], 112-13
W(Y) [genetic fitness as a function of pheno-

type, in Freudian model], 195
V [variance of a quantitative character]
definitions: for a culturally transmitted character, 71; for a genetically transmitted
character, 118
in models of: frequency-dependent bias, 222;
in a Freudian model, 195; guided variation, 96

V. [variance of learning errors], 94-95
cost of reducing, 114-15
effect on equilibrium value of L, 105, 110,

114
V; [variance of cultural trait i], 248
V;, Vp [equilibrium variance of indicator trait
and preference trait], 261
V. [equilibrium variance of initial phenotype
under cultural transmission], 122

V, [equilibrium variance of initial phenotype
under genetic transmission],

121

V(H) [variance of a cultural trait before learning among individuals who will experience
environment H], 107
Vu [amount of environmental variability]
definitions: in fluctuating environment, 111;
in heterogeneous environment,

W(Y,H) [fitness as a function of phenotype, Y,
and environment, H], 100-101
Warfare. See Conflict between human groups
Weak forces
decision-making costs result in, 285
and direct bias, 141-42, 263

and environment plus culture hypothesis,

161-62
and frequency-dependent bias, 214
and guided variation, 116-17
importance of, 138

and indirect bias, 263
and quantitative characters, 141—42
and selection, 103, 150, 184-85,

188,

214-15
See also Costly information hypothesis
Weak interaction hypothesis, 273-74
Weights, transmission, definition of, 64-65.

See also A; a
Wilson, E. O., on relationship between genes

and culture, 159, 163-66
Witkin, H., adaptive hypothesis for cognitive
~

style of, 179

107

effect on relative fitness of genetic and cultural transmission, 125-28
V [average variance of a cultural trait in all
environments], 109

X [heritable variant of a quantitative character]
definitions: for a cultural trait, 70; for a genetic initial phenotype, 118

Values, not necessarily cultural variation, 38

bias, 192; model of guided variation, 94

in: Freudian model, 194—97; model of direct

Subject Index and Glossary of Mathematical Terms
X; [numerical value of the cultural variant of

the ith model], 66
in model of: biased transmission, 139;
frequency-dependent bias, 212, 222; horizontal transmission, 68—69; natural selection, 186

Xj [jth culturally transmissible factor of the ith
model], 78
Xto, Xpo [values of indicator and preference

____traits after oblique transmission], 262
Xi, Xp [the means of indicator and preference

331

Y [individual phenotypic value of quantitative
character], 70
in Freudian model, 194—96

__ in model of guided variation, 94

Y [mean phenotypic value], 96
Y(H) [mean phenotypic value in environment
H], 107

Y [mean phenotypic value in all environments],
108
Y [vector of individual phenotypic values for
several characters], 248

traits after oblique transmission], 262
Xj, Xp; [values of indicator trait and preference

_

traits], 252

X [mean value of a quantitative character], 71
in model of: biased transmission, 142;
frequency-dependent bias, 222; guided
variation, 96

__ as mean genetic value, 118
X, [mean of X at generation t in a fluctuating

___

environment], 111

X(H) [mean of X in environment H], 107

z [cost of biased transmission], 149
in model in which selection and direct bias
interact, 192

Z, [naive individual’s estimate of the ith
model’s cultural variant], 71
in models of: biased transmission,

141;

frequency-dependent bias, 222

X [equilibrium mean of X under guided

Z,; [naive individual’s estimate of the value of
the jth factor of the ith model], 78

X(H) [equilibrium mean of X in environment
H], 108
X [vector of numbers characterizing

Zi, Zr; [value of naive individual’s estimates of

_

variation], 97-98

individual’s cultural repertoire], 247

indicator and preference trait], 252
Z; [naive individual’s vector of estimates of jth
model’s cultural traits], 249

Shy

*tecent”

*a4
*.
aa

RoBERT Boyp is assistant professor of
anthropology at Emory University.
PETER J. RICHERSON is professor in the
Division of Environmental Studies at the
University of California, Davis. Their
work on this subject has been published in
many journals, including the Journal of
Theoretical Biology, the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
Human Ecology, and BioScience.

For information on books of related interest or

for a catalog of new publications, please write:
Marketing Department
The University of Chicago Press
5801 South Ellis Avenue
Chicago, Illinois 60637
Uke
Printed in U.S.A.

“Culture and the Evolutionary Process is one of the
most interesting and thought-provoking books that I have read.

Boyd and Richerson present a cogent, insightful and enlightening development

of the entire topic of the evolution of human behavior. In addition, theirsisthe

only account that I have read that cogently discusses the modern controversies
in terms of the underlying assumptions made regarding genetic and cultural
evolutionary processes and how they operate. Their analysis clearly illustrates
that many of the a priori assumptions on both sides of these controversies must
be strongly qualified. Furthermore, they show exactly how these assumptions
must be qualified.”

—Michael J. Wade, Department of Biology, University of Chicago
“Boyd and Richerson will do the most to unify the traditional concerns of
cultural anthropology and sociology with a disciplined consideration of biological evolution. Their explicit modeling of the conditions under which biological
evolution would produce the capacity to learn, and the separate and rarer
capacity for cultural transmission, seems to me to be brilliant, even though but
a background for their main message. While like all formal models, theirs too
involves great simplifications, the subtleties that emerge are impressive.”
—Donald Campbell, Department of Social Relations and Psychology,
Lehigh University
“Boyd and Richerson consider various learning rules by which initially naive
organisms gain and process information about their environment.
For example,
organisms may learn where and how to forage or find a mate. Boyd and
Richerson then propose that the question of culture boils down to the following: when is it advantageous for the organism not to learn in this way (on its
own, so to speak), but instead simply to copy mom, or another member of its
species? To understand this is to understand the origin of culture. By phrasing
such an apparently complicated question:in such a simple yet meaningful way,
the authors open up.a new domain for testable inferences about culture.”
—Richard E. Michod, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
University of Arizona

“The authors avoid the simple-minded solutions of both the sociobiologist
and the cultural relativist. Their book should go a long way to reduce the
. polarization that bedevils anthropology.”
—B. J. Williams, Department of Anthropology, University of California,
Los Angeles

|

.

ye
AS
th
Vib
V

oy
ls

ore
h==
Lh

The University of Chicago Press :

esty
Os
as
ee
Te
Sh

Lai
ea

